                   The Probert E-Text Encyclopaedia  
 
                      First Published, June 1996  
 
                      Third Edition, August 1996  
 
 
 
Introduction to the third edition 
 
 
 
The Probert E-Text Encyclopaedia is intended to satisfy the need for a  
freely distributable, machine readable, general knowledge reference  
work. In addition, it seeks to address more obscure issues which  
existing general knowledge multimedia encyclopaedias may omit, in this  
way providing a useful supplement to existing commercial applications.  
 
 
 
Following the success and popularity of the previous editions of the  
Probert E-Text Encyclopaedia I have now considerably enlarged and  
corrected the text. There is still a lot of data which should be  
added, and enlarged editions will follow. Please contact the author  
for details of the latest edition, details of other formats including  
CSV and HTML. 
 
 
 
Matthew Probert 
Basingstoke 
August 9th 1996 
 
 
  
  
ANIMAL ANATOMY  
  
 
Acetabulum 
Acetabulum is an anatomical term applied to any cup-like cavity, as that 
of a bone to receive the protuberant end of another bone.  
 
Adam's Apple 
Adam's Apple is the popular name for the thyroid cartilage. That is the 
prominence seen in the front of the throat of man. It is small and 
invisible in females. It is so called from the notion that a piece of the 
forbidden fruit stuck in Adam's throat.  
 
Adenoids 
Adenoids is the pathological enlargement of the lymphoid tissue.  
 
Adipose tissue 
Adipose tissue is a form of connective tissue in which the constituent 
cells are modified to enable them to contain droplets of oil. (Fat). 
 
Adrenal glands 
The adrenal glands are a pair of glands on the kidneys which secrete 
adrenalin and other hormones.  
 
Alimentary 
The alimentary canal is the channel in an animal through which food 
passes. 
 
Alveoli 
see "Alveolu" 
 
Alveolus 
An alveolus is a lung air sac where gas exchange with the blood occurs. 
 
Amitosis 
Amitosis is the anatomical term given to cell reproduction by direct 
division. The nucleus becomes constricted in the middle, forming an hour-
glass shape and then divides into two. This is followed by a division of 
the whole protoplasmic mass of the cell; two daughter cells are thus 
formed, each containing a nucleus. Direct division occurs in leucocytes 
and bone-cells, and in the epithelial cells lining the urinary bladder. 
 
Amnion 
The amnion is a membranous sac which surrounds the embryo; it is 
developed in reptiles, birds and mammals, but not in amphibia or fishes. 
 
Anaphase 
Anaphase is the 3rd stage of mitosis cell reproduction. The centromeres 
split into 2 halves which repel each other. 
 
Anatomy 
Anatomy describes the structure and organisation of living creatures. 
 
Anconeus 
The Anconeus is a muscle in the human arm. It assists the Triceps in 
extending the elbow-joint. 
 
Ankle 
The ankle is the joint connecting the foot with the leg.  
 
Antenna 
An antenna is a sensory organ found on the head of insects. 
 
Antibody 
An antibody is a bodily protein that inactivates infection. 
 
Aorta 
The aorta is the largest artery in the human body. It carries blood from 
the heart to the arms, legs and head.  
 
Aqueous humour 
The Aqueous humour is the watery fluid found in the space between the 
cornea and the lens of the eyes of vertebrates. 
 
Areolar tissue 
Areolar tissue is a generalised form of connective tissue in which the 
constituent cells are separated by a semi-fluid matrix in which both 
white connective tissue and yellow elastic fibres are found.  
 
Arm 
The arm is a limb extending from the shoulder of an animal. 
 
Artery 
An artery is a vessel that conveys blood from the heart.  
 
Atlas 
In anatomy, the 1st cervical vertebrae is called the atlas because it 
supports the globe of the head. 
 
Auricle 
The auricles are resevoirs within the heart which receive blood from the 
veins. 
 
Axis 
In anatomy, the 2nd cervical vertebrae is called the axis. It provides 
the pivot for the atlas and the head.  
 
Biceps 
The biceps are a long fusiform muscle on the front of the arm. They are 
used to flex the elbows.  
 
Bile 
Bile is a secretion of the liver stored in the gall bladder.  
 
Bladder 
The bladder is a sack in the abdomen which collects urine from the 
kidneys. 
 
Blood 
Blood is a body fluid that carries food and oxygen to cells.  
 
Blubber 
Blubber is the thick coating of fat enveloping whales.  
 
Bone 
Bone is the hard skeletal part of an animal.  
 
Bowel 
The bowels is a popular term for the division of the alimentary canal 
below the stomach, that is the intestines.  
 
Bowels 
see "Bowel" 
 
Brachialis 
The Brachialis is a muscle covering the front of the human elbow-joint. 
It is used to flex the elbow. 
 
Brain 
The brain is the central organ of the nervous system. 
 
Bronchi 
The bronchial tubes (bronchi) are a division of the trachea which branch 
repeatedly into small bronchioles within the lungs.  
 
Bronchial 
see "Bronchi" 
 
Calcaneum 
In human anatomy, the calcaneum is the largest and strongest of the 
tarsal bones. It projects backwards beyond the bones of the leg to 
provide a lever for the muscles of the calf. 
 
Capillary 
A capillary is a fine blood vessel which carries blood to cells.  
 
Capitate bone 
The capitate bone is the largest bone in the human wrist. 
 
Carpus 
The carpus are the bones of the human wrist.  
 
Cartilage 
Cartilage or cartilaginous tissue covers the ends of the bones where they 
come together to make a joint. It enables the bones to move easily. 
 
Cartilaginous joint 
In anatomy, a cartilaginous joint is an articulation where the bones are 
joined by cartilage, and a limited amount of movement is possible. 
 
Cell 
A cell, in biological terms, is the material unit of all living things. 
 
Cephalic 
Cephalic is a classification of human skull. It refers to the shape of 
skull posessed by Kaffirs and Native Australians.  
 
Cerebellum 
The cerebellum is the lower part of the brain, it controls muscular 
movements and postural equilibrium. 
 
Cerebrum 
The cerebrum is the upper and larger portion of the brain and occupies 
the whole of the dome of the cranium.  
 
Cervical vertebrae 
The cervical vertebrae are the 7 vertebrae closest to the skull.  
 
Clavicle 
In human anatomy, the clavicle is a long bone which lies almost 
horizontally at the root of the neck. It serves 2 main functions; to act 
as a prop which braces back the shoulder and enables the limb to swing 
clear of the trunk. And to transmit part of the weight of the limb to the 
axial skeleton. 
 
Coccyx 
In human anatomy, the coccyx is the bone at the apex of the sacrum. It is 
usually comprised of 4 vertebrae fused together.  
 
Colon 
The colon is the large intestine. 
 
Connective tissue 
Connective tissue is derived from the mesenchyme and includes a number of 
tissues which have a passive, binding function. In a connective tissue 
the parent cells are separated more or less widely from one another by a 
homogeneous matrix or ground substance, in which fibres may or may not be 
present.  
 
Coracobrachialis 
The Coracobrachialis is a human muscle used to draw the arm forwards and 
prevent side-sway when the arm is raised by the Deltoid. 
 
Coracoid Bone 
In birds, the Coracoid Bone is the bone joining the sternum to the 
shoulder and supporting the wing. In mammals it is represented by the 
coracoid process of the scapula. 
 
Costal Cartilages 
In human anatomy, the costal cartilages are bars of hyaline cartilage 
which extend forwards from the anterior ends of the ribs and contribute 
to the elasticity of the thorax.  
 
Cuneiform bones 
The cuneiform bones are three bones in the human foot behind the first 
three metatarsal bones.  
 
Cuticle 
The cuticle is the horny outside layer of skin. 
 
Deltoid 
The deltoid muscle is a triangular muscle in the shoulder used to lift 
the upper arm. 
 
Desmology 
Desmology is the branch of anatomy dealing with ligaments and sinews. 
 
Diaphragm 
The diaphragm is a large transverse muscle at the base of the thorax, 
used in respiration to draw air into the lungs. 
 
Diploe 
Diploe is the anatomical term for the spongy substance between flat 
bones.  
 
Dura Mater 
The dura mater is the membrane which covers the brain.  
 
Ear 
The ear is the organ used for hearing. It converts sound into electrical 
impulses that are fed to the brain.  
 
Eggs 
see "Egg" 
 
Endocrine gland 
An endocrine gland is one which secretes hormones into the body.  
 
Epidermis 
The epidermis is the outer layer of an animal's skin. 
 
Epiglottis 
The epiglottis is a fibro-cartilaginous lid shaped like a leaf which 
covers the upper opening of the larynx.  
 
Epithelium 
Epithelium is an anatomical term a basic type of bodily tissue. It 
comprises the external surface of the skin, the internal surfaces of the 
digestive, respiratory and urogenital systems and others. The constituent 
cells of an epithelium are always closely packed together and the 
intercellular substance is reduced to a minimum.  
 
Erythrocyte 
Erythrocyte is the anatomical term for red corpuscles.  
 
Exocrine gland 
An exocrine gland is one which secretes onto a surface. Such as a sweat 
gland.  
 
Eye 
The eye is the organ of vision. 
 
Fallopian tubes 
The Fallopian tubes are two tubes in mammals which carry eggs from the 
ovary to the uterus. Eggs are fertilised in the Fallopian tubes by sperm, 
and then moved to the ovary by way of cilia. 
 
Femur 
The femur is the thigh bone in the human leg. 
 
Fibrous joint 
In anatomy, a fibrous joint is an articulation in which the surfaces of 
the bones are fastened together by intervening fibrous tissue, and in 
which there is no appreciable motion, as in the joints between the bones 
of the human cranium.  
 
Fibrous Joints 
In anatomy, fibrous joints are articulations in which the surfaces of the 
bones are fastened together by intervening fibrous tissue, and in which 
there is no appreciable motion. For example between the bones of the 
cranium. 
 
Fibula 
The fibula is the lateral bone of the leg. It is slender, compared to the 
tibia. It's purpose is to give attachment to the muscles. 
 
Flagellum 
Flagellum are a small hair-like organ on the surface of certain cells. 
They are the motile organs of the sperm cells of higher animals. 
 
Flat bone 
In human anatomy, flat bones occur where the principal requirement of the 
skeleton is to protect delicate structures or provide broad surfaces for 
muscular attachment. The bones are comprised of two thin layers of 
compact bone separated by a variable quantity of spongy substance.  
 
Flat bones 
In human anatomy, flat bones provide protection and a broad surface for 
muscular attachment. They are formed of two thin layers of compact bone 
separated by a spongy substance.  
 
Foetus 
A foetus is an unborn offspring of an animal. 
 
Follicle 
A follicle is a small group of cells that surrounds and nourishes a 
structure such as a hair (hair follicle) or a cell such as an egg 
(Graafian follicle).  
 
Fontanelle 
The fontanelle is a membrane covered vault in the skull. It normally 
closes during infancy. 
 
Fovea 
The fovea is a small depression in the retina where vision is most acute. 
 
Frontal bone 
The frontal bone is the plate at the front of the top of the human skull. 
It forms the forehead.  
 
Gall Bladder 
The gall bladder is a small muscular sac attached to the liver. 
 
Ganglion 
A ganglion is an enlargment occuring somewhere in the course of a nerve, 
and containing nerve cells in addition to nerve filaments. 
 
Gastric Juice 
Gastric Juice is a clear, colourless fluid secreted by the mucous 
membrane of the stomach, and is the chief agent in digestion. 
 
Gastric System 
The Gastric System refers to all parts of the body which contribute to 
digestion. 
 
Gastrocnemius 
The Gastrocnemius is a muscle forming most of the human calf. 
 
Gill 
see "Gills" 
 
Gills 
Gills are a respiratory organ found in animals which obtain oxygen from 
water, such as crustaceans, molluscs, fish and amphibians.  
 
Gizzard 
The gizzard is a strong muscular part of a bird's alimentary canal which 
enables them to grind their food. Gizzards also occur in many 
gasteropods, and in certain cephalopods and crustaceans. 
 
Gland 
A gland is a bodily organ that manufactures and secretes enzymes, 
hormones or other chemicals.  
 
Gluteus maximus 
The Gluteus maximus is a large muscle in the human back-side. 
 
Gnathic 
Gnathic is a classification of human skull shape found in Europeans.  
 
Graafian Vesicles 
The Graafian Vesicles are numerous small globular transparent follicles 
found in the ovaries of mammals. Each follicle contains one ovum whic is 
expelled when it reaches maturity. 
 
Haemoglobin 
Haemoglobin is the protein that carries oxygen in the blood.  
 
Hallux 
The hallux is the innermost of the five digits which normally compose the 
hind foot of a vertebrate. In humans the big toe, in a bird the hind toe. 
 
Hamate bone 
The hamate bone is one of the bones in the human wrist. 
 
Haversian Canals 
The Haversian Canals are a network of minute canals, which traverse the 
solid substance of bones and proceed from the central cavity. They convey 
nutrient vessels to all parts.  
 
Heart 
The heart is the muscle in vertebrates which pumps blood around the body. 
 
Hormone 
A hormone is a product of the endocrine glands. 
 
Humerus 
The humerus is the long bone in the upper region of the human arm. It 
joins with the shoulder at the glenoid cavity.  
 
Hypothalamus 
The hypothalamus is the region of the human brain below the cerebrum 
which regulates rhythmic activity and physiological stability within the 
body, including water balance and temperature.  
 
Ileum 
The ileum is a continuation of the jejunum and opens into the colon.  
 
Iliacus 
The Iliacus is a muscle in the human thigh. 
 
Insulin 
Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas.  
 
Interossei 
Interossei are muscles in the human hand and foot.  
 
Intestine 
The intestine is the convoluted membranous tube which extends from the 
stomach to the anus and which receives the ingested food from the 
stomach, mixes it with bile, pancreatic juice and intestinal secretions, 
gives origin to the chyle and delivers the indigestible products from the 
system. 
 
Intestines 
see "Intestine" 
 
Irregular bones 
In anatomy, irregular bones are bones which do not fit into any of the 
other bone types. They are comprised of a spongy substance enclosed 
within a thin layer of compact bone. 
 
Jejunum 
The jejunum is the second part of the human small intestine. It is about 
9 feet long. 
 
Joint 
A joint is a structure where two bones meet.  
 
Jugular vein 
The jugular vein returns blood from the head to the heart in vertebrates. 
 
Kidney 
The kidney is a gland used for filtering urine from the blood.  
 
Kidneys 
see "Kidney" 
 
Labrum 
The labrum is the ventral lobe in the front of an insect's head which 
covers the mouth parts. 
 
Lachrymal gland 
The lachrymal gland is a gland beneath the upper eye lid which secretes 
tears which drain from the inner corner of the eye through the Lachrymal 
duct to the nose.  
 
Lacteals 
Lacteals are small lymphatic vessels which arise from the mucous membrane 
lining of the small bowel.  
 
Lambdoidal suture 
The lambdoidal suture is a fissure which divides the parietal bone from 
the occipital bone in the human skull.  
 
Larynx 
The larynx is a cavity at the top of the trachea containing the vocal 
cords.  
 
Leucocyte 
Leucocytes is the anatomical term for colourless corpuscles. (White blood 
cells). 
 
Leucocytes 
Leucocytes is the anatomical term for colourless corpuscles. (White blood 
cells). 
 
Lip 
The lips are the fleshy edges of the opening of the mouth.  
 
Liver 
The liver is the largest gland in the human body. The liver has three 
functions: it secretes bile, stores glycogen and converts waste products 
into urea and uric acid for excretion. 
 
Long bones 
In human anatomy, long bones are found in the limbs where they form 
levers. They have a hollow shaft. 
 
Longus capitis 
The longus capitis is the human muscle which flexes the head. 
 
Longus cervicis 
The longus cervicis is the human muscle which bends the cervical portion 
of the vertebral column forwards.  
 
Lumbar vertebrae 
In human anatomy, the lumbar vertebrae are the 5 vertebrae following the 
thoracic vertebrae.  
 
Lumbricals 
The Lumbricals are muscles in the human fingers used in writing etc.  
 
Lunate bone 
The lunate bone is one of the bones in the human wrist. 
 
Lung 
see "Lungs" 
 
Lungs 
The lungs are organs used for respiration.  
 
Malleus 
The malleus is a small bone in the middle ear which transmits sound 
vibrations from the tympanum to the incus.  
 
Mandible 
In human anatomy, the mandible is the bone at the front and bottom of the 
skull (lower jaw).  
 
Masseter 
The masseter is the human muscle which moves the mandible for chewing.  
 
Maxilla 
The maxilla is the bone comprising the upper jaw in the human skull.  
 
Maxillae 
The maxillae form the upper jaw of the human skull. 
 
Maxillary artery 
In human anatomy, the maxillary artery is the larger terminal branch of 
the external cartoid artery. It rises behind the neck of the mandible and 
is at first imbedded in the partoid gland. It passes forwards between the 
neck of the mandible and the sphenomandibular ligament and then to the 
Lateral pterygoid and enters the pterygopalatine fossa between the two 
heads of that muscle. 
 
Mentalis 
The mentalis is a muscle in the human face, it raises and protudes the 
lower lip and wrinkles the skin of the chin. 
 
Metacarpal 
see "Metacarpus" 
 
Metacarpus 
The metacarpus are the five bones of the human palm.  
 
Metaphase 
Metaphase is the 2nd stage of mitosis cell reproduction. The chromosomes 
have become irregular V shaped and arrange themselves around the equator.  
 
Metatarsal 
see "Metatarsus" 
 
Metatarsus 
The metatarsus are the 5 bones in the anterior part of the human foot. 
They are between the tarsus and the phalanges. 
 
Mitosis 
Mitosis is cell reproduction by indirect division. It is the common 
method of division in the higher animals. It is characterised by a series 
of complex changes in the nucleus leading to its subdivision. The process 
takes between 30 minutes and a few hours, and is comprised of 4 stages: 
prophase, metaphase, anaphase and Telophase.  
 
Mucin 
Mucin is a protein and the principal constituent of mucus.  
 
Mucous 
Mucous is a term for surfaces which secret or are covered with mucus. 
 
Mucus 
Mucus is a thick fluid secreted by mucus membranes in animals. It acts as 
a protective barrier, lubricant and a carrier of enzymes. 
 
Nasal 
Nasal is a classification of human skull shape found in primarily in 
Negroes. 
 
Neck 
The neck is the part of the body which connects the head with the 
shoulders.  
 
Nerve 
The nerves are a part of the body which generate and transmit electrical 
impulses.  
 
Nose 
The nose is an animal's organ of smell. 
 
Occipital bone 
The occipital bone is the plate forming the back of the human skull.  
 
Occipitofrontalis 
The occipitofrontalis is the broad muscle of the human scalp. 
 
Oesophageal 
Oesophageal is a secretion from the membrane of the oesophagus. It is a 
mucus lubricant to assist peristalsis.  
 
Oestrogen 
Oestrogen is a hormone produced in the ovary of a vertebrate. 
 
Omentum 
The omentum is a long fold of the peritoneum. It is loaded with fat and 
lies in front of the bowels in the abdominal cavity. It protects the 
bowels and keeps them warm.  
 
Orbicularis oculi 
The orbicularis oculi is the broad, flat, elliptical muscle which 
occupies the human eylids and spreads down towards the cheek. 
 
Orbit 
In human anatomy, the orbits are a pair of roomy cavities in the skull 
which contain the eyes.  
 
Orbital 
Orbital is a classification of human skull shape and refers to the skulls 
of Tasmanians.  
 
Orbital opening 
The orbital openings are the eye-sockets in the human skull.  
 
Os calcis 
The Os calcis is the heel bone of the human foot. 
 
Osseous tissue 
see "bone" 
 
Palatine bones 
The palatine bones are part of the floor of the nasal cavity and the roof 
of the mouth in the human skull.  
 
Pancreas 
The pancreas is an elongated secreting gland which secretes pancreatic 
juice and insulin. 
 
Parathyroid Glands 
The parathyroid glands are two small glands in the neck concerned with 
the use of calcium in the body.  
 
Parietal bone 
The parietal bone is the plate on the top of the human skull, comprising 
most of the dome of the skull. 
 
Parietal bones 
The parietal bones form the sides and the roof of the human cranium.  
 
Patella 
The patella is the largest of the sesamoid bones. It is situated in front 
of the knee-joint. It is a flattened, triangular bone.  
 
Pectineus 
The Pectineus is a muscle in the human thigh. 
 
Pelvis 
The pelvis is a bony girdle in vertebrates that connects the body with 
the lower extremities. 
 
Pericardium 
The Pericardium is a conical, fibroserous sac containing the human heart 
and the roots of the major veins and arteries. 
 
Phalange 
The phalanges are the bones of the human digits (fingers).  
 
Piriformis 
The Piriformis is a muscle in the human hip.  
 
Pisiform bone 
The pisiform bone is one of the bones in the human wrist. 
 
Pituitary gland 
The pituitary gland is a gland within the brain concerned with regulating 
growth and regulating other ductless glands.  
 
Placenta 
The placenta connects a foetus to the uterine wall. It is the organ by 
means of which the nutritive, respiratory and excretory functions of the 
foetus are carried on.  
 
Plantais 
The Plantais is a muscle in the leg.  
 
Plasma 
Plasma is the liquid part of the blood. 
 
Platysma 
The platysma is a neck muscle in the human body.  
 
Procerus 
The procerus is a muscle in the human nose. 
 
Progesterone 
Progesterone is a hormone that regulates the menstrual cycle in 
vertebrates.  
 
Prophase 
Prophase is the 1st stage in mitosis cell reproduction. The nucleolus 
disappears and a number of chromosomes become apparent. 
 
Pulmonary Artery 
The pulmonary artery opens out of the right ventricle in the human heart 
and conveys venous blood to the lungs for collecting oxygen. 
 
Quadrate Bone 
The Quadrate Bone is a bone developed in reptiles and birds by means of 
which the lower jaw is articulated to the skull.  
 
Radius 
The radius is one of the two long bones which form the human lower arm. 
 
Rectum 
The rectum is the lowest portion of the large intestine, terminating at 
the anus. 
 
Rib 
In anatomy, the ribs are elastic arches of bone which are connected 
behind with the vertebral column and form a large part of the skeleton of 
the thorax. 
 
Sacrum 
In human anatomy, the sacrum is the large triangular bone inserted like a 
wedge between the two hip bones. It is formed by the fusion of the five 
sacral vertebrae. 
 
Sagittal suture 
The sagittal suture is the fissure running along the length of the top of 
the human skull dividing the parietal bone into two hemispheres.  
 
Saliva 
Saliva is a secretion from the salivary glands in the oral cavity. It 
contains mucus to lubricate food and enzymes. 
 
Scaphoid 
The scaphoid is a small bone in the human hand. 
 
Scaphoid bone 
The scaphoid bone is one of the bones in the human wrist. 
 
Sciatic 
The sciatic is a nerve in the leg.  
 
Sclerous tissue 
Sclerous tissue provides the stiffening which is essential for the 
formation of the general framework of the body. There are two varieties 
of sclerous tissue: cartilage and bone.  
 
Sebaceous glands 
The sebaceous glands are ducts in the skin which secrete oil to lubricate 
the skin and hair.  
 
Secretin 
Secretin is a hormone produced by the small intestine in vertebrates that 
stimulates the production of digestive secretions.  
 
Semitendinosus 
The Semitendinosus is a muscle in the human thigh.  
 
Septum 
A septum is a muscular partition seperating the two sides of the human 
heart. 
 
Short bone 
In human anatomy, short bones occur where the skeleton is intended for 
strength. Short bones consist of a spongy substance surrounded by a thin 
crust of compact bone.  
 
Short bones 
In human anatomy, short bones are part of the skeleton designed for 
strength and compactness. They are comprised of a spongy substance 
surrounded by a thin crust of compact bone.  
 
Sinus 
A sinus is an air-filled space in the diploe of a skull bone. 
 
Skeleton 
The skeleton is the hard internal or external framework of bones, 
cartilage or shell which provides protection for an animals organs, 
provides fixing points for the muscles and a general frame for the body.  
 
Skin 
In the human body, skin, or Dermoid Tissue, is composed of two layers, 
the cuticle, epidermis or epithelium and the corium or dermis. 
 
Sphenoid bone 
The sphenoid bone is situated at the base of the human skull, in front of 
the temporal bones and the basilar part of the occipital bone.  
 
Spinales 
The spinales are human muscles which extend the vertebral column. 
 
Spleen 
The spleen is an organ of vertebrates that regulates the number of red 
blood cells. 
 
Splenii 
The splenii are two muscles in the human body, the splenius capitis and 
the spelnius cervicis. They are used to move the head backwards, to one 
side and to rotate it.  
 
Splenius capitis 
see "Splenii" 
 
Splenius cervicis 
see "Splenii" 
 
Sternocostalis 
The sternocostalis is a muscle in the human body. 
 
Sternohyoid 
The sternohyoid is a muscle in the human body which dpresses the hyoid 
bone.  
 
Sternomastoid 
The sternomastoid is a muscle in the human neck.  
 
Sternum 
In anatomy, the sternum is a long flat bone which forms the median 
portion of the anterior wall of the thorax. The top of the sternum 
supports the clavicles. 
 
Subclavius 
The Subclavius is a muscle in the human body between the clavicle and the 
first rib. It steadies the clavicle during movements of the shoulder. 
 
Supinator 
The Supinator is a muscle surrounding the upper one-third of the radius 
in the human arm. It is used to rotate the radius, thereby turning the 
palm of the hand forwards. 
 
Suture 
A suture is an anatomical term for an articulation found only in the 
skull, where the margins of the bones articulate with one another, but 
are separated by a thin layer of fibrous tissue (sutural ligament) and is 
continuous externally with the periosteum on the outside of the skull and 
internally with the fibrous layer of the dura mater.  
 
Synovial joint 
In anatomy, a synovial joint is one where the bones are covered with 
articular cartilage but are not attached to each other. These joints 
allow extensive movement. 
 
Talus 
In human anatomy, the talus is the principle connecting link between the 
foot and the bones of the leg and has an important part in the formation 
of the ankle. 
 
Tapetum 
The tapetum is the irregular sector in certain animal's eyes which shines 
owing to an absence of black pigment. Tapetum is found in the eyes of 
cats. 
 
Tarsal 
see "tarsus" 
 
Tarsus 
In human anatomy, the tarsus comprises 7 short bones which make up the 
skeleton of the posterior half of the foot.  
 
Teat 
The teat is the small protuberance at the tip of the breast of female 
mammals upon which the ducts of the mammary gland open to supply milk to 
the suckling young.  
 
Telophase 
Telophase is the 4th stage of mitosis cell reproduction. The nuclear 
membrane and the nucleolus reappear and the cytoplasm undergoes 
constriction around the equator of the achromatic spindle. The 
constriction deepens and the original cell is gradually divided.  
 
Temple 
In anatomy, the temple is the flat part either side of the head between 
the forehead and the ear. 
 
Temporal bones 
The temporal bones are situated at the sides and base of the human skull. 
They assist in the protection of the cerebrum and the transmission of 
sound waves to the ear. 
 
Temporalis 
The temporalis is the human facial muscle which raises the mandible, 
closing the mouth. 
 
Tendon 
A tendon is a connective tissue that joins muscles to bone in 
vertebrates.  
 
Tensor 
A tensor is a type of muscle which tightens or stretches a part of the 
body.  
 
Testes 
Testes is the plural of testis. 
 
Testicle 
Testicle is another name for testis.  
 
Testis 
The testis is the male organ in which sperm are produced. Most mammals 
have two testis enclosed in the scrotum. 
 
Testosterone 
Testosterone is the male sex hormone secreted by the testes.  
 
Thalamus 
The thalamus is the interior region of the brain where certain important 
sensory nerves, especially the optic nerve, originate. 
 
Theca 
In anatomy, a theca is a case or sheath which encloses some organ or 
part.  
 
Thenar 
The thenar is the ball of muscle at the base of the thumb.  
 
Thoracic vertebrae 
In anatomy, the thoracic vertebrae are the 12 vertebrae following from 
the cervical vertebrae. They provide articulation for the ribs.  
 
Thorax 
The thorax in vertebrates is the part of the body containing the heart 
and lungs and protected by the rib cage. 
 
Thymus 
The thymus is a ductless glandular body situated near the base of the 
neck in vertebrates. Its function is uncertain, and in man it disappears 
or diminishes soon after childhood.  
 
Thyroid 
The thyroid is an endocrine gland near the larynx in vertebrates. It 
influences growth and development. 
 
Thyroid gland 
see "Thyroid" 
 
Tibia 
The tibia is the medial and stronger of the two bones of the leg. It is 
prismoid in form, and posesses a shaft and two ends. Its purpose is to 
support the weight of the body.  
 
Tibiotarsus 
In birds, the tibiotarsus is the equivalent of the tibia, but it is fused 
at the lower end with some of the bones of the tarsus.  
 
Tongue 
The tongue is a muscular organ in the mouth of a tetrapod.  
 
Tonsils 
The tonsils are a pair of small organs on either side of the root of the 
tongue composed of lymphatic tissue and instrumental in protecting the 
throat from infection.  
 
Tooth 
A tooth is a hard structure in the mouth of vertebrates.  
 
Trachea 
The trachea (windpipe) carries air from the larynx to the bronchi.  
 
Trapezium 
The trapezium is a small bone in the human hand below the little finger.  
 
Trapezium bone 
The trapezium bone is one of the bones in the human wrist.  
 
Trapezius 
The trapezius is a human muscle. It is a flat, triangular muscle, 
covering the back of the neck and shoulder. 
 
Trapezoid bone 
The trapezoid bone is one of the bones in the human wrist.  
 
Triceps 
The Triceps are muscles situated on the back of the upper arms in the 
human body. 
 
Triquetral bone 
The triquetral bone is one of the bones in the human wrist. 
 
Trochanter 
The trochanter is a protuberance in the upper part of the femur to which 
the muscles attach.  
 
Trochoides 
In anatomy, a trochoides is a pivot joint.  
 
Trypsin 
Trypsin is an enzyme present in pancreatic juice. It converts proteins 
into peptones. 
 
Tympanum 
The tympanum (middle ear) is a cavity in the temporal bone filled with 
air, closed externally by the tympanic membrane and containing a chain of 
small bones which convey sound vibrations to the inner ear.  
 
Ulna 
The ulnar is one of the two long bones which form the human lower arm. It 
connects with the humerus at the elbow. 
 
Unciform 
The unciform is a small bone in the human hand below the first finger.  
 
Ureter 
The Ureters are two membranous tubes which carry urine from the kidneys 
to the bladder in vertebrates.  
 
Urethra 
The urethra is a membranous canal which leads from the bladder to the 
outside world. It channels urine from the bladder out of the body.  
 
Uterus 
The uterus (womb) is the organ in which young are conceived, develope and 
are protected until birth.  
 
Vein 
A vein carries venous blood from the body to the heart. 
 
Ventricle 
The ventricles are chambers within the heart which force blood along the 
arteries.  
 
Vertebra 
The vertebrae are the bones of the vertebral column. Vertebrae are 
irregular bones comprised of two distinct parts, an anterio termed the 
body, and a posterior part termed the vertebral arch. 
 
Vertebral column 
The vertebral column is the central axis of all vertebrate animals. It is 
comprised of a number of independant irregular bones (vertebrae), which 
are firmly connected to one another, but are capable of a limited amount 
of independant movement. 
 
Vomer 
The vomer is a thin flat bone which forms the hinder and lower part of 
the septum of the human nose.  
 
Waist 
The waist is the part of the body between the ribs and the hips.  
 
Yolk 
The yolk is part of an embryo which serves as nutrition for the rest of 
the embryo. 
 
Zygomatic bone 
In a human, the zygomatic bone is the bone in the skull responsible for 
the prominence of the upper and anterior part of the cheek. It forms the 
lateral part of the lower margin of the orbital opening. 
  
  
AIRCRAFT  
  
 
737 
see "Boeing_737" 
 
A129 
The A129 is an Italian two-seat light attack helicopter.  
 
Agusta 
Agusta is an Italian aircraft manufacturer. 
 
AH-1 
The AH-1 is an American two-seat light attack helicopter. 
 
AH-64 
The AH-64 is an American two-seat attack helicopter.  
 
Airbus 
The airbus is a medium-haul commercial airliner. It was developed by an 
international consortium in the 1970s.  
 
AN-12 
The Antonov AN-12 (cub) is a Soviet paratroop passenger and freight 
transport aircraft. It was developed in the 1960s. It has a top speed of 
482mph and is armed with 2 23mm NR-23 cannons in a powered tail turret.  
 
AN-2 
The Antonov AN-2 is a Soviet biplane developed in 1947 as a stol 
transporter. It has a top speed of 160mph. It is commonly used as a 
paratroop trainer. 
 
AN-22 
The AN-22 (Antei) is a Soviet heavy logistic transport aircraft. The AN-
22 was developed in the mid 1960s. It has a top speed of 422mph.  
 
AP68-300 
see "spartacus" 
 
AV-8b 
The AV-8B is a harrier ground attack aircraft.  
 
Avro 504 
The Avro 504 was a biplane developed during 1913. It was used as a light 
reconnaissance bomber and trainer aircraft.  
 
Avro-Manchester 
The Avro-Manchester was a British heavy bomber aircraft of the Second 
World War. It was powered by two 2000hp rollS-vulture engines providing a 
top speed of 325mph. It was armed with two power operated gun turrets, 
one in the nose and one on top of the fuselage and a four-gun turret in 
the tail.  
 
B-1 
The B-1 is an American strategic bomber and cruise missile carrying 
aircraft. 
 
BA 
BA is an abbreviation for British Aerospace, a British aircraft 
manufacturer. 
 
BA 146 
The BA 146 is a British short-haul regional airliner. 
 
BA hawk 
The BA hawk is a British two seat tandem trainer and light tactical 
military aircraft.  
 
BA VC10k 
The BA VC10k is a British flight refuelling tanker aircraft.  
 
Beechcraft 1900 
The Beechcraft 1900 is an American regional airliner and corporate 
transport aircraft.  
 
Bell 
Bell is an American aircraft manufacturer.  
 
BK 117 
The BK 117 is a German and Japanese multi-purpose eight to twelve seater 
helicopter.  
 
Blenheim 
The Bristol Blenheim was a British twin-engined day bomber and long-range 
fighter aircraft of the Second World War. It was powered by two 920hp 
Bristol mercury xv 9-cylinder engines giving a top speed of 295mph. It 
was armed with one forward-firing gun in the port wing and one gun in a 
retractable hydraulic gun turret on top of the fuselage. When used as a 
fighter the armament was increased by four guns mounted in the nose. 
 
Bleriot 
Louis Bleriot made the first crossing of the English channel in an 
aircraft. The aircraft was his monoplane. The crossing took place on july 
25th 1909. 
 
BO 105l 
The BO 105l is a German five/six-seat light utility helicopter. 
 
Boeing 
Boeing are an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Boeing 307 
The Boeing 307 was the world's first high-altitude aircraft. A 
pressurised cabin allowed it to cruise at 23000 feet above turbulence. 
 
Boeing 737 
The Boeing 737 is an American short-haul commercial airliner. 
 
Boeing 747 
The Boeing 747 is an American long-haul commercial airliner.  
 
Boeing 757 
The Boeing 757 is an American short/medium-haul commercial airliner.  
 
Boeing 767 
The Boeing 767 is an American medium-haul commercial airliner.  
 
Boeing E-3 
The Boeing E-3 (sentry) is an airborne warning and control system 
aircraft. 
 
Boeing KC-135R 
The Boeing KC-135R (stratotanker) is an American flight refuelling tanker 
aircraft. 
 
Buccaneer 
The Buccaneer is a British strike aircraft. It is powered by two Rolls-
Royce RB.168 Spey Turbofans and carries a variety of weapons in a 
rotating bomb bay. It is capable of near sonic speed flight at sea level.  
 
Cessna 
Cessna are an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Cessna caravan 
The Cessna caravan is a light utility transport aircraft. 
 
CH-53E 
The CH-53E is an American amphibious assault transport helicopter.  
 
Chinook 
The chinook is a series of transport helicopters characterised by a long 
body and rotablades at each end. 
 
CL-601 
The CL-601 is a Canadian light corporate transport aircraft.  
 
Concorde 
Concorde is a supersonic airliner.  
 
Cornu 
The Cornu helicopter was the first helicopter to made a successful free 
flight with a man on board. It was invented by a Frenchman, Paul Cornu in 
1907. 
 
Cub 
see "AN-12" 
 
Dakota 
see "DC-3" 
 
DC-10 
The DC-10 is a medium-haul commercial airliner. It is made by McDonnell 
Douglas of the USA. 
 
DC-3 
The DC-3 was an American 21 passenger transport aircraft of the 1930s. 
The military version was called the Dakota.  
 
DC-8 
The DC-8 is an American long-haul commercial airliner.  
 
DC-9 
The DC-9 is an American short/medium-haul commercial airliner.  
 
DH4 
The DH4 was a two-seater daylight bomber used durng the first world war. 
It first flew in December 1916.  
 
DO-228 
The DO-228 is a German light-regional airliner and utility transport 
aircraft.  
 
Dornier 
Dornier are a German aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Dornier DO17 
The Dornier DO17 was a German twin engined bomber of the Second World 
War. It was powered by two bramo 323 engines giving it a top speed of 
275mph. 
 
Dornier DO215 
The Dornier DO215 was a German twin-engined bomber aircraft of the Second 
World War. It was powered by two 1150hp Daimler Benz engines giving it a 
top speed of 312mph. 
 
Entendard 
The entendard is a French anti-ship warfare fighter. It carries a single 
exocet missile and has a maximum speed of 650mph.  
 
Epsilon 
see "tb_30" 
 
F-14 
The F-14 is an American two-seat shipboard multi-role fighter aircraft. 
 
F-15 
The F-15 is an American single-seat air superiority fighter aircraft. 
 
F-18 
The F-18 is an American single-seat shipboard and shore-based multi-role 
fighter and attack aircraft. 
 
F-20 
The F-20 is an American single-seat multi-role fighter aircraft.  
 
Fairchild 
Fairchild is an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Fairchild 340 
The Fairchild 340 is a joint Swedish and American regional airliner and 
corporate transport aircraft. 
 
Fencer 
see "su19" 
 
Fokker D.VII 
The Fokker D.VII was a single-seater fighter scout aircraft used by the 
German forces during the first world war. 
 
Fokker DVII 
The fokker DVII was a German biplane fighter aircraft during the first 
world war. It was famed for it's manoeuvrability.  
 
G222 
The G222 is an Italian general-purpose military transport plane. It was 
developed in 1970.  
 
Galeb 
The Galeb is a Yugoslavian two-seat trainer aircraft. 
 
Gloster whittle e28/39 
The Gloster Whittle e28/39 was Britain's first jet aircraft.  
 
Gotha G Vb 
The Gotha G Vb was a heavy bomber used by the German army during the 
first world war. 
 
Handley page hp42 
The Handley Page HP42 was a biplane airliner. It was in use between 1931 
and 1940 by imperial airways.  
 
Handley Page o/400 
The Handley Page o/400 was a British heavy bomber used during the first 
world war. It entered service in 1918.  
 
Harrier 
The Harrier is a British VTOL multi-role fighter aircraft.  
 
Hawk 
see "ba_hawk" 
 
Hawker Hart 
The Hawker Hart was a biplane. It was developed in 1928. Several versions 
were manufactured. The standard light bomber, and the demon which was a 
two-seat fighter, the hardy was designed for general-purpose duties and 
the hind was a high-powered variation.  
 
Heinkel 178 
The heinkel 178 was a German jet propelled aircraft. It made its first 
flight in 1939.  
 
Heinkel HEIII 
The heinkel HEIII was a German twin-engined bomber aircraft of the Second 
World War. It was powered by two 1200hp Junkers jumo engines giving it a 
top spee d of 274mph.  
 
Hercules 
The hercules is the nickname of the l-100-30. 
 
Hughes 
Hughes are an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Hughes 500e 
The Hughes 500e is an American five-seat light utility helicopter.  
 
Hughes 500md 
The Hughes 500md is an American light gunship and multi-role helicopter.  
 
Hurricane 
The Hawker Hurricane was a British fighter aircraft of the Second World 
War. It was armed with 12 machine guns and powered by a single 1030hp 
Rolls-Royce engine giving it a top speed of 335mph. 
 
Il-62 
The Il-62 is a Soviet long-range passenger jet. It can carry 186 
passengers.  
 
Il-76 
The il-76 is a Soviet heavy-duty medium/long-haul military and commercial 
freighter aircraft. 
 
Il-86 
The il-86 is a Soviet medium-haul commercial airliner.  
 
Imperial airways 
Imperial airways was formed in 1924 providing flights between Britain and 
Africa, Australia and north America. In 1939 imperial airways was 
reorganised into BOAC which in turn developed into BAC and British 
airways. 
 
Islander 
The Islander is a Britsh twin-engined light transport plane. It can carry 
upto 10 passengers. The Islander is manufactured by Britten-Norman Ltd, 
and is powered by two 260bhp Lycoming o-540 engines giving a speed of 
169mph. 
 
JA 37 
The JA 37 is a Swedish single-seat all-weather interceptor fighter 
aircraft with secondary strike capability. It is made by saab. 
 
Jaguar 
The jaguar is a joint British and French single-seat tactical strike 
fighter aircraft.  
 
Jetstream 31 
The jetstream 31 is a British light corporate transport and regional 
airliner. It can carry up to 19 passengers.  
 
Jetstream 31ez 
The jetstream 31ez is an inshore maritime patrol version of the jetstream 
31. It is fitted with 360 degree radar and a search light and carries a 
crew of five. 
 
Junkers F-13 
The Junkers f-13 was a German passenger carrying aircraft. It entered 
service in 1919 and remained in use until the 1930s.  
 
Junkers J4-10 
The Junkers J4-10 was a two-seater low level fighter aircraft. It was the 
first all-metal aircraft built during the first world war.  
 
Junkers ju87 
The Junkers ju87 (stuka) was a German single-engine dive bomber of the 
Second World War. It was powered by a 1000hp jumo engine giving it a top 
speed of 242 mph. 
 
Ka-25 
The ka-25 is a Soviet shipboard anti-submarine warfare helicopter.  
 
Ka-32 
The ka-32 is a Soviet shipboard anti-submarine warfare helicopter.  
 
L-100-30 
The l-100-30 is an American medium/long-range military and commercial 
freight transport aircraft. 
 
L-29 
The aero l-29 (maya) is a Czechoslovakian basic trainer aircraft. It has 
a top speed of 407mph. 
 
L-39 
The l-39 (albatros) is a Czechoslovakian basic and advanced trainer 
aircraft. It has a top speed of 466mph. The l-39 was developed in the 
early 1970s as a replacement for the l-29. The l-39 is unusual in that it 
can operate from unpaved surfaces.  
 
Lancaster 
The lancaster was a four-engined British heavy bomber of the Second World 
War.  
 
Lebaudy 
The lebaudy was the first airship. It's maiden flight was on november 
12th 1903.  
 
Lockheed 
Lockheed is an American aircraft manufacturer.  
 
Lockheed c-5a 
The Lockheed c-5a is an American military heavy logistics transport 
plane. It can carry a payload of 100 tons.  
 
M-21 
The M-21 is a Polish agricultural aircraft. 
 
Magister 
The magister was a British initial trainer aircraft made by philips and 
powis during the Second World War. It had a top speed of 142mph.  
 
Master I 
The Master I was a British advanced trainer aircraft made by philips and 
powis during the Second World War. It had a top speed of 250mph. 
 
Maya 
see "L-29" 
 
MB-339a 
The MB-339a is an Italian tandem two-seat advanced trainer aircraft.  
 
Messerschmitt ME109E 
The Messerschmitt ME109E was a German fighter aircraft of the Second 
World War. It was powered by a single 1150hp Daimler-Benz engine giving 
it a top speed of 354mph.  
 
Messerschmitt ME109F 
The Messerschmitt ME109F was a German fighter aircraft of the Second 
World War. It was powered by a single 1375hp Mercedes-Benz engine giving 
it a top speed of 370mph. It was armed with a single 20mm cannon in the 
nose and two machine guns in the nose.  
 
Mi-14 
The MI-14 is a Soviet amphibious anti-submarine helicopter. 
 
Mi-17 
The MI-17 is a Soviet medium transport helicopter.  
 
Mi-24 
The MI-24 is a Soviet assault and anti-armour helicopter. 
 
Mi-26 
The MI-26 is a Soviet military and commercial heavy-lift helicopter.  
 
Mi-8 
The MI-8 is a Soviet assault transport helicopter.  
 
Mig 
The MIG are various military aircraft of Soviet origin. 
 
Mig-23 
The MIG-23 is a Soviet single-seat air superiority and close air support 
fighter aircraft.  
 
Mig-25 
The MIG-25 is a Soviet single-seat interceptor fighter aircraft.  
 
Mig-27 
The MIG-27 is a Soviet single-seat tactical strike and close air support 
fighter aircraft.  
 
Montgolfier 
The Montgolfier brothers made a hot air balloon, in which Jean Francois 
Pilatre de Rozier and the Marquis d'Ariandes made the world's first 
aerial voyage over Paris on november the 21st 1783. 
 
Mosquito 
The mosquito was a British all wooden bomber aircraft of the Second World 
War.  
 
Moth 
The moth was a British biplane. It was cheap, reliable and easy to fly 
making it popular with the general public. The RAF used it as a primary 
trainer aircraft. The moth entered production in 1931 and ended after the 
Second World War.  
 
Mu-300 
The mu-300 is a Japanese light corporate transport aircraft.  
 
Ndn-1 
The ndn-1 is a British two-seat basic trainer aircraft. 
 
Ndn-6 
The ndn-6 is a British two-seat agricultural aircraft.  
 
Nimrod 
The Nimrod is a British long-range maritime patrol aircraft.  
 
Northrop 
Northrop are an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Nymph 
The Nymph is a British single-engined four-seat light aircraft. It is 
powered by a 115bhp Lycoming 0-235-CIB engine and has a speed of 117mph.  
 
Orao 
The orao is a joint Yugoslavian and Romanian single-seat close air 
support fighter aircraft.  
 
Owlet 
The Owlet was a British tricycle trainer aircraft made by General 
Aircraft during the Second World War. It had a top speed of 125mph. 
 
Oxford 
The Airspeed Oxford was a British trainer aircraft used for training 
bomber pilots during the Second World War. It was a twin-engined low-wing 
cantilever monoplane with a retractable undercarriage. It had two 375hp 
Armstrong Siddeley cheetah X engines producing a top speed of 197mph at 
8300ft. It had a service ceiling of 23000ft. 
 
PA-42 
The PA-42 is an American light corporate executive transport aircraft 
made by piper. It is nicknamed cheyenne.  
 
PA-48 
The PA-48 is an American single-seat close air support aircraft.  
 
PIK-23 
The PIK-23 is a Finnish two-seat primary trainer and glider tug aircraft. 
 
Pilcher 
Percy Pilcher, an Englishman, may be said to have invented the hang 
glider. During the late 19th century he invented a man launched glider. 
 
Piper 
Piper is an American aircraft manufacturer. 
 
R3140 
The R3140 is a French light cabin monoplane aircraft. 
 
RF-5 
The RF-5 is an American single-seat tactical reconnaissance aircraft. 
 
S-70 
The S-70 is an American tactical transport helicopter. It is nicknamed 
the black hawk.  
 
Saab 
Saab are a Swedish aircraft and automobile manufacturer.  
 
SE5 
The SE5 was a British fighter aircraft used during the first world war. 
 
Seasprite 
The seasprite is an American multi-purpose helicopter. It has a maximum 
speed of 200mph and is often used in anti-submarine and anti-ship warfare 
when it is armed with 2 mk46 torpedoes. 
 
Sentry 
see "Boeing_E-3" 
 
Sheriff 
The sheriff is a British light cabin monoplane and trainer aircraft. It 
was developed during the early 1980s. 
 
Shorts 330 
The Shorts 330 is a British regional airliner and commercial freighter 
aircraft. It is nicknamed the sherpa.  
 
Shorts 360 
The Shorts 360 is a British regional airliner.  
 
Sikorsky 
Sikorsky is an American helicopter manufacturer.  
 
Sikorsky Bolshoi 
The Sikorsky Bolshoi was the first four engined aircraft. It could carry 
eight passengers. Its first flight was in 1913.  
 
Sikorsky R-4 
The Sikorsky R-4 was the world's first production helicopter. It entered 
service in 1942. 
 
Socata 
Socata is a French aircraft manufacturer. 
 
Sopwith Camel 
The Sopwith camel was a British fighter aircraft used during the first 
world war. 
 
Spad VII 
The Spad VII was a single seater fighter aircraft used during the first 
world war.  
 
Spartacus 
The AP68-300 (spartacus) is a light multi-role transport and utility 
aircraft from italy. It was first developed in 1978 and entered service 
in 1983. 
 
Spitfire 
The Vickers-Armstrong spitfire was a British fighter aircraft of the 
Second World War. The MK I was armed with 4 machine guns in each wing. 
The MK II and MK V were armed with 2 20mm cannons and 4 machine guns. It 
had a top speed of about 400mph. 
 
Stuka 
see "Junkers_JU87" 
 
SU-17 
The SU-17 is a Soviet single-seat attack and counterair aircraft. 
 
SU-19 
The Sukhoi SU-19 (fencer) is a Soviet two-seat multi-role combat 
aircraft. It has a top speed of mach 2.5. It is armed with a 23mm gsh-23 
twin-barrel cannon and can carry air-to-ground or air-to-air missiles.  
 
SU-20 
The Sukhoi SU-20 is a Soviet single-seat attack and close-support 
aircraft. It has a top speed of mach 2.7. It is armed with 2 30mm NR-30 
cannons one in each wing root and often carries AS-7 air-to-surface 
missiles. 
 
SU-24 
The SU-24 is a Soviet deep penetration interdictor and strike aircraft. 
 
SU-25 
The SU-25 is a Soviet single-seat close air support aircraft. 
 
Sukhoi 
Sukhoi is a Soviet aircraft manufacturer. 
 
T-1040 
The T-1040 is an American light regional airliner.  
 
T-34c 
The T-34c is an American tandem two-seat primary trainer aircraft. It was 
developed during the 1970s. 
 
T67 
The T67 is a British two-seat primary trainer aircraft. 
 
TB 30 
The TB 30 is a French two-seat primary trainer aircraft.  
 
TB-20 
The TB-20 is a French light cabin monoplane aircraft. 
 
Tiger Moth 
The Tiger Moth was a British biplane made by De Haviland. It had a top 
speed of 109mph. 
 
Tomcat 
Tomcat is the nickname of the F-14. 
 
Tornado 
The Tornado is a British two-seat interceptor fighter aircraft. 
 
TR-1 
The TR-1 is an American single-seat high-altitude tactical reconnaissance 
aircraft. 
 
TU-16 
The Tupolev TU-16 is a Soviet strategic bomber. It has a top speed of 
587mph. It is armed with 6 23mm NR-23 cannons in a radar-directed manned 
tail-turret and remotely-aimed upper dorsal and rear ventral barbettes. 
The TU-16 entered service in 1954. 
 
Tupolev 
The Tupolev is a Soviet medium-range strategic bomber and maritime 
strike/reconnaisance aircraft. 
 
VC10 
The VC10 is a British passenger jet airliner. It carries 163 passengers 
and has a top speed of mach 0.86. 
 
Viscount 
The Viscount is a British passenger airliner. It carries 73 passengers 
and a crew of 3. It has a range of 1725 miles and a top cruising speed of 
357mph.  
 
VTOL 
VTOL is an abbreviation for vertical take off and landing. It is used 
with aircraft which can take-off and land with out a runway.  
 
Vulcan 
The Vulcan is a British four-jet medium bomber. It is powered by Rolls-
Royce Bristol Olympus 301 turbojets giving it a speed of Mach 0.94.  
 
Wellington 
The Vickers Wellington was a series of British twin-engined long-range 
night bomber of the Second World War. The mark I was powered by two 
1000hp Bristol pegasus XVIII radial engines giving a top speed of 250mph. 
Later models had a slightly higher top speed. It was armed with hydraulic 
gun turrets in the nose and tail. Some models also had a hydraulic gun 
turret amidships beneath the fuselage. It carried 9 500lb bombs in 3 
bays.  
 
Whitley 
The Armstrong-Whitworth Whitley IV was a British twin-engined heavy 
bomber of the Second World War. It was powered by two 1030hp Rolls-Royce 
merlin IV 12-cylinder engines giving it a top speed of 245mph. It was 
armed with a powered operated single gun turret in the nose and a four-
gun turret in the tail. 
 
Wright flyer 
The Wright flyer was the aircraft invented by the Wright brothers. On 
december 17th 1903 it made the first sustained flight by a man-carrying 
heavier-than-air machine. 
 
Y-10 
The Y-10 is a Chinese medium-haul commercial transport aircraft.  
 
YAK-36mp 
The YAK-36mp is a Soviet shipboard VTOL air defence and strike fighter 
aircraft.  
  
  
ROCKS AND MINERALS  
  
 
Accessory 
Accessory refers to a mineral that occurs in a rock in minute quantities, 
and does not affect the way the rock is named or classified.  
 
Acidic rock 
Acidic rock refers to an igneous rock that consists mostly of light 
coloured minerals and has more than 66% free or combined silica.  
 
Actinolite 
Actinolite has the formulae Ca2(Mg,Fe)5Si8O22(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It commonly occurs in the crystalline schists, being often the chief 
constituent of green-coloured schists and greenstones. Used somewhat as 
an asbestos material. 
 
Adamantine 
Adamantine refers to a brilliant luster like that of a diamond. Results 
from a mineral having a high index of refraction. 
 
Adamite 
Adamite has the formulae Zn2(AsO4)(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It has brilliant fluorescence. Of scientific interest and much desired by 
collectors.  
 
Aegirite 
Aegirite has the formulae NaFe(Si2O6). 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a rock-forming mineral found mainly in rocks rich in soda and poor 
in silica. Named after Aegir, Icelandic god of the sea.  
 
Agaric Mineral 
Agaric Mineral is one of the purest native carbonates of lime. It is 
chiefly found in the clefts of rocks and at the bottom of some lakes.  
 
Agate 
Agate is a semi-precious stone comprised mainly of silica. It is a 
compact variety of chalcedony. It has a pattern of banding which occurs 
due to chemical admixtures of haematite, limonite and other minerals.  
 
Alabaster 
Alabaster is naturally occurring hydrated calcium sulphate. 
 
Albite 
Albite has the formulae NaAlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is widely distributed, rock-forming mineral. Present in pegmatite 
dikes and may be found in crystals.  
 
Alkaline rock 
Alkaline rock refers to any rock which contains more than average amounts 
of potassium bearing and sodium bearing minerals. 
 
Allanite 
Allanite has the formulae (Ce,Ca,Y)2(Al,Fe)3(SiO4)3(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It occurs as a minor constituent of many igneous rocks. Frequently 
associated with epidote. Found in some magnetic bodies.  
 
Allemontite 
Allemontite is a natural alloy of arsenic and antimony. It has a relative 
hardness of 4.  
 
Almandine 
Almandine is a variety of precious garnet, reddish or violet in colour. 
 
Alteration 
Alteration refers to physical or chemical change in a rock or mineral 
after its original formation. Can result in new minerals or in textural 
changes in the rock.  
 
Alumina 
Alumina is aluminium oxide and occurs as ruby, sapphire, bauxite. 
 
Alunite 
Alunite has the formulae KAl3(SO4)2(OH)6. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is usually formed by sulfuric acid solutions acting on rocks rich in 
alkalic feldspar. Used in the production of alum.  
 
Amblygonite 
Amblygonite has the formulae (Li,Na)Al(PO4)(F,OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It occurs in lithium and phosphate rich granite pegmatites. Associated 
with spodumene, apatite, tourmaline, lepidolite. 
 
Amethyst 
Amethyst is a precious stone. It is quartz coloured with manganese. 
 
Amorphous 
Amorphous refers to 'Without form'. The term is applied to rocks and 
minerals that lack definite crystal structure. 
 
Amygdule 
Amygdule refers to a mineral containing cavity in an igneous rock formed 
by escaping gas. 
 
Anaclime 
Anaclime has the formulae NaAlSi2O62H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is of interest to collectors. Found in cavities of intrusive and 
volcanic igneous rocks; often as clear shiny crystals. Associated with 
calcite and zeolites. 
 
Anatase 
Anatase has the formulae TiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a form of rutile. Found in granite, gneiss, mica schist, 
maetamorphic limestone, and dolomite. May be present as an accessory 
mineral in the rocks or in a quartz vein traversing it. Used as a coating 
of welding rods. A derivative it titanium.  
 
Andalusite 
Andalusite has the formulae Al2SiO5. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is formed by the metamorphism of aluminous shales and slate. Used in 
the manufacture of spark plugs and other porcelains. May serve as a gem 
stone if clear and transparent. Name from Andalusia, a province of Spain. 
 
Andesine 
Andesine has the formulae NaAlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
 
Anglesite 
Anglesite has the formulae PbSO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a common, minor ore of lead. Formed by the oxidation of galena. 
Found in the upper, oxidzed portions of lead veins. Named after the 
Island of Anglesey.  
 
Anhydrite 
Anhydrite has the formulae CaSO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It has rectangular cleavage fragments. Occurs in a manner similar to 
gypsum and often found with it but not as common. Found in the cap rock 
of salt domes and in limestone rocks. From the Greek meaning 'without 
water'. 
 
Annivite 
Annivite is a variety of terahedrite containing bismuth and usually iron 
and zinc.  
 
Anorthite 
Anorthite has the formulae (Na,Ca)AlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is widely distributed and abundant rock-forming feldspar.  
 
Anthophyllite 
Anthophyllite has the formulae (Mg,Fe)7Si8O22(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It occurs in crystalline schists rich in magnesium. Of interest to 
collectors. 
 
Antimonite 
Antimonite is an antimony ore. It was used by the Greeks as a cosmetic 
for darkening the eyelids. 
 
Antimony 
Antimony has the formulae Sb. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a native semimetal and difficult to distinguish from arsenic. 
Rather brittle and a poorer conductor of heat and electriciy than native 
metals. 
 
Apatite 
Apatite has the formulae Ca5(F,Cl,OH)(PO4)3. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is widely distributed as an accesory constituent in all classes of 
rock. Found in crystals and masses. Crystallized apatite has been 
extensivley for fertilizer. Transparent varieties of fine colour are 
sometimes used for gems - but it's too soft for extensive use. 
 
Aphanitic rock 
Aphanitic rock refers to a rock in which the crystalline constituents are 
too small to be distinguished without magnification.  
 
Apophyllite 
Apophyllite has the formulae KCa4Si8O2O(OH)8H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a hydrothermal mineral filling cavities in basalt and tufaceous 
rocks. Associated with stilbite, scolecite, calcite, prehnite, analcime. 
 
Aragonite 
Aragonite has the formulae CaCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It forms easily in a sedimentary environment but only stable in 
metamorphic rocks formed at high temperatures. 
 
Arfvedsonite 
Arfvedsonite has the formulae Na2-3(Fe,Mg,Al)5Si8O22(OH,F)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is typical of alkaline plutonic rocks that are rich in iron. 
 
Argentite 
Argentite has the formulae Ag2S. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It lacks distinct cleavage. An important primary silver ore. The name is 
from Latin meaning 'silver'. Occurs disseminated in galena and in the 
cementation zone of lead and zinc deposits. Associated with cerussite, 
chlorargyrite, native silver. 
 
Argillaceous 
Argillaceous refers to composed mostly of or containg clay; such as 
shale.  
 
Arsenates 
Arsenates refers to minerals in which arsenate (AsO4) is an important 
part. 
 
Arsenic 
Arsenic has the formulae As. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It has a garlicky odor; otherwise difficult to distinguish from antimony. 
A minor ore of arsenic and a relatively rare mineral found in veins in 
crystalline rocks associated with silver, cobalt, or nickel ores.  
 
Arsenopyrite 
Arsenopyrite has the formulae FeAsS. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is the most common mineral containing arsenic. It occurs with tin and 
tungsten ores in high temperature deposits as a deposition from hot 
waters. Frequently associated with gold. Also found with copper and 
silver ores. 
 
Asbestos 
Asbestos is a fibrous mineral with a high melting and combustion point. 
 
Atacamite 
Atacamite has the formulae Cu2Cl(OH)3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a comparatively rare copper mineral. Occurs in arid regions in the 
upper oxidized zone of copper deposits.  
 
Augite 
Augite has the formulae (Ca,Na)(Mg,Fe,Al,Ti)(Si,Al)2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an important rock forming mineral. Chiefly found in dark coloured 
igneous rocks, especially those whose magmas were rich in iron, calcium 
and magnesium. Seldom found in rocks that contain much quartz. A common 
memeber of the pyroxene group. Told from amphibole by cleavage.  
 
Autunite 
Autunite has the formulae Ca(UO2)2(PO4)210-12H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It has strong fluorescence. A secondary mineral found in the zone of 
oxidation and weathering of uranite or other uranium minerals. Used as an 
ore of uranium.  
 
Axinite 
Axinite has the formulae Ca2(Fe,Mn)Al2(BO3)(Si4O12)(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It occurs in cavities in granite and in the contact zones surrounding 
granite intrusions. 
 
Azurite 
Azurite has the formulae Cu3(CO3)2(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a minor ore of copper with an intense azure-blue colour. Alters to 
malachite. Associated with limonite, calcite, chalcocite, chrysocolla and 
other secondary copper minerals. Reacts vigorously with hydrochloric 
acid. 
 
Barite 
Barite has the formulae BaSO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is major ore of barium. Has a high SG for a light coloured mineral. 
Common gangue mineral in hydrothermal veins or as a repacement mineral in 
veins of limestone and dolomite. Associated with lead, silver and 
antimony sulfides. 
 
Barytes 
Barytes was the first mineral to be found to be luminescent when heated, 
and led to the discovery of the luminescence of minerals. It has a 
relative hardness of 3.5. 
 
Basanite 
Basanite is a smooth, black siliceous mineral.  
 
Basic rock 
Basic rock refers to an igneous rock with a low percentage of silica and 
a high percentage of pyroxene, hornblende, and labradorite.  
 
Bauxite 
Bauxite is a sedimentary rock group of various aluminium oxides, a 
principal ore of aluminium, found in France and Jamaica. Bauxite was 
named after the place where it was first found, Les Baux in France. It 
has a relative hardness of 1 to 3. 
 
Bedding 
Bedding refers to the arrangement of sedimentary rocks in about parallel 
layers or strata which correspond to the original sediments. 
 
Beryl 
Beryl has the formulae Be3Al2Si16O18. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It has a characteristic six-sided outline. Used as a gem stone of various 
colours. It green variety is emerald. Beryl is also the major source of 
the rare element beryllium, a light metal similar to aluminum. Quite 
common and occurs usually in granite rocks, mica schists and with tin 
ores. 
 
Biotite 
Biotite has the formulae K(Mg,Fe)2(Al,Fe)Si3O10(OH,F)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is widely distributed rock forming mineral. Occurs in igneous and 
metamorphic rocks. A common member of the mica group. 
 
Bismuth 
Bismuth has the formulae Bi. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is the chief ore of bismuth and often shows broad cleavage surfaces. A 
somewhat rare mineral occurring in connection with ores of silver, 
cobalt, nickel, lead, and tin. Bismuth forms low melting alloys. It is 
used in fuses, medicine and cosmetics.  
 
Bismuthinite 
Bismuthinite has the formulae Bi2S3. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is a rare ore of bismuth. Occurs in veins that show definite relations 
to igneous rocks. 
 
Bituminous rocks 
Bituminous rocks refers to rocks that contain tar, petroleum, or asphalt. 
 
Blende 
Blende is a zinc ore. It generally contains more than half its weight in 
zinc, a quarter sulphur and often a small amount of iron.  
 
Bloodstone 
Bloodstone is a dark green variety of chalcedony. 
 
Bohemian garnet 
see "Pyrope" 
 
Bole 
Bole is an earthy mineral occuring in amorphous masses , and composed 
chiefly of silica with alumina, iron and occasionally magnesia. 
 
Boracite 
Boracite has the formulae Mg3B7O13Cl. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It occurs associated with beds of halite, anhydrite, and gypsum. Formed 
by the evaporation of bodies of salt water.  
 
Borates 
Borates refers to a group of minerals in which the borate radical (BO3) 
is an important constituent.  
 
Borax 
Borax has the formulae Na2B4O710H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It dissolves in water and has a sweetish alkaline taste. Formed as a 
deposit from the evaportation of salt lakes. Used in cleansing, 
antiseptic,, preservative, and chemical uses. Is a source of boron which 
is used in fuels.  
 
Bornite 
Bornite has the formulae Cu5FeS4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an ore of copper with a colourful tarnish(peacock). Widely 
occurring, it is found in basic rocks and metamorphic deposits. 
 
Botryoidal 
Botryoidal refers to resembling a bunch of grapes. A mineral of this type 
appears to have a surface covered with spherical bulges.  
 
Boulangerite 
Boulangerite is a lead ore. It contains 55 percent lead. It has a 
relative hardness of 2.5. 
 
Bournonite 
Bournonite has the formulae PbCuSbS3. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an ore of lead, copper, and antimony which often exhibits twinned 
crystals. Occurs in in veins formed at moderate temperatures.  
 
Brimstone 
Brimstone is another name for sulphur.  
 
Brookite 
Brookite has the formulae -TiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a source of titanium but deposits are usually too small to be of 
commercial use. 
 
Brown Spar 
Brown Spar is the name given to some crystalline varieties of dolomite 
tinged with peroxide of Iron 
 
Brucite 
Brucite has the formulae Mg(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a decomposition product of magnesium silicates, especially 
serpentine. Variety: nemalite.  
 
Calamine 
Calamine is a zinc ore. 
 
Calcareous 
Calcareous refers to containing calcium carbonate or calcite. 
 
Calcic 
Calcic refers to containing calcium.  
 
Calcite 
Calcite has the formulae CaCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It effervesces vigorously with HCl. Clear specimens exhibit double 
refraction. Occurs as widespread sedimentary rock masses such as 
limestone. Crystalline metamorphosed limestones are called marbles. Fine 
grained deposits form chalk. Variety: onyx. 
 
Caliche 
Caliche is naturally occurring sodium nitrate found in Chile. 
 
Carbonaceous 
Carbonaceous refers to composed chiefly of organic carbon. (i.e. carbon 
derived from plant and animal remains.) 
 
Carbonates 
Carbonates refers to minerals, such as calcite, where the carbonate 
radical (CO3) is an important constituent.  
 
Carnallite 
Carnallite has the formulae KMgCl36H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a source of potassium coumpounds and magnesium. Has a bitter salty 
taste. 
 
Carnelian 
Carnelian is a semi-precious gemstone consisting of quartz with iron 
impurities which give it a translucent red colour. Carnelian is found 
mainly in Brazil, Japan and India. 
 
Carnotite 
Carnotite has the formulae K2(UO2)2(VO4)23H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 1. 
It is an ore of uranium and vandium. Found in sands, sandstones and 
around petrified trees. Probably formed as a deposition from meteoric 
waters. Strongly radioactive.  
 
Cassiterite 
Cassiterite has the formulae SnO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is the principal ore of tin. Widely distributed in small amounts but 
commerically available in only a few localities. Frequently associated 
with wolframite. Also found as rolled pebbles in placer deposits ('stream 
tin'). Usually found in veins associated with quartz, in or near granitic 
rocks. 
 
Celestine 
Celestine is a natural sulphate of strontium. 
 
Celestite 
Celestite has the formulae SrSO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It often found disseminated through limestone or sandstone, or lining 
cavities in such rocks. Associated with calcite, dolomite, gypsum, 
sulfur, fluorite. Also found as a gangue mineral in lead veins. Used to 
prepare nitrate of strontium for fireworks and tracer bullets and in the 
refining of beet sugar.  
 
Cerussite 
Cerussite has the formulae PbCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is an important and widely distributed supergene lead ore formed by 
the action of carbonated waters on galena in the upper zone of lead 
veins. Often found associated with galena and sphalerite. 
 
Chabazite 
Chabazite has the formulae Ca(Al2Si4)O126H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a mineral of secondary origin found lining cavities in volcanic and 
intrusive igneous rocks.  
 
Chalcanthite 
Chalcanthite has the formulae CuSO45H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It dissolves quickly in water and produces a blue solution. A minor ore 
of copper and found only in arid regions. Occurs near the surface in 
copper veins. Often deposited on iron from the water in copper mines. 
Used in calico printing, insecticides and for industrial purposes.  
 
Chalcedony 
Chalcedony is a variant of quartz comprised of silica. Chalcedony was 
named after Chalkedon, near Istanbul. It was traditionally used for 
decorative objects and amultes. It has a relative hardness of 7.  
 
Chalcocite 
Chalcocite has the formulae Cu2S. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is one of the most important copper ore minerals. It occurs primarily 
in enriched zones of sulfide deposits.  
 
Chalcopyrite 
Chalcopyrite has the formulae CuFeS2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is the most widely occuring copper mineral and one of the most 
important ore sources of that metal. Occurs as an original constituent of 
igneous rocks, in pegmatic dikes, and in contact with metamorphic 
deposits. May carry gold or silver and become an ore of those metals.  
 
Chalcosine 
Chalcosine is an important copper ore. It was discovered in the 16th 
century. 
 
Chili Saltpetre 
see "Cubic_Nitr" 
 
Chlorite 
Chlorite has the formulae (Mg,Fe)6(AlSi3)O10(OH)8. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a mineral group whose members usually exhibit a charactersitic 
green colour. The formula above is for 'green mica'. Distinguished from 
muscovite and green phlogopite by a lack of elasticity.  
 
Chondrodite 
Chondrodite has the formulae (Mg,Fe)3(SiO4)(OH,F)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a common metamorphic mineral in dolomitic marbles. 
 
Chromite 
Chromite has the formulae FeCr2O4. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is slightly magnetic. The only ore of chromium. A common constituent 
of peridotite rocks and the serpentines derived from them. Also 
associated with corundum. One of the first minerals to separate from a 
cooling magma. Chromium is widely used in metal plating and in stainless 
steel.  
 
Chrysoberyl 
Chrysoberyl has the formulae BeAl2O4. 
It has a relative hardness of 9. 
It occurs in granite rocks, pegmatites, and in mica schists. Frequently 
in river sands and gravels. Serves as a gem stone: alexandrite and "cats 
eye" which can be of great value. 
 
Chrysocolla 
Chrysocolla has the formulae (Cu,Al)2H2Si2O5(OH)4nH2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a minor ore of copper. A mineral of secondary origin, occuring in 
the oxidized zones of copper veins. Associated with malachite, azurite, 
cuprite, native copper. Named from two Greek words meaning 'gold' and 
'glue'.  
 
Chrysostom 
Chrysostom is a gem stone of beryllium aluminate. 
 
Cinnabar 
Cinnabar (vermilion) is a red crystalline form of mercuric sulphide. It 
has the formulae HgS and a relative hardness of 3. 
It often has a bright red colour. The only important source of mercury 
and it's found in few localities. Occurs as vein fillings near recent 
volcanic rocks and hot springs. Used in scientific equipment, in drugs, 
and with tin in silvering mirrors. Many other uses.   
 
Clastic rock 
Clastic rock refers to a sedimentary rock comprised of fragments of 
preexisting rocks that have been transported and deposited. 
 
Clay 
Clay refers to a soft sediment or deposit that is plastic when wet and 
comprised of very fine-grained materials, mainly hydrous aluminum 
silicates. 
 
Cleavage 
Cleavage refers to a mineral is said to possess cleavage if when it 
breaks it yields definite plane surfaces. Cleavage can be perfect as in 
micas or, in some minerals, completely lacking. Cleavage is always 
parallel to crystal faces. 
 
Clinozoisite 
Clinozoisite has the formulae Ca2Al3Si3O12(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 7.  
 
Cobaltite 
Cobaltite has the formulae CoAsS. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an ore of cobalt. Usually found in high temperature deposits, 
disseminated in metamorphic rocks, or in vein deposits with other cobalt 
and nickel minerals.  
 
Coelestine 
Coelestine is a mineral used in pyrotechnics and a s a source of 
strontium. Occassionaly it is cut and used as a gem stone. It has a 
relative hardness of 3.5.  
 
Colemanite 
Colemanite has the formulae Ca2B6O115H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a major ore of boron. Occurs in high temperature hydrothermal veins 
or disseminated in metamorphic rocks associated with other cobalt and 
nickel sulfides/arsenides.  
 
Columbite 
Columbite has the formulae (Fe,Mn)(Nb,Ta)2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It shows a bluish iridescent fracture surface. The main ore of niobium 
and tantalum; used in metallurgy to create heat-resistant alloys and in 
the rust proofing of stainless steel. 
 
Concretion 
Concretion refers to an accumulation of mineral matter when mineral 
particles become cemented together into an orderly, rounded form. 
 
Contact metamorphism 
Contact metamorphism refers to metamorphism resulting from the intrusion 
of magma which takes place at or near the contact point with the molten 
rock.  
 
Copper 
Copper has the formulae Cu. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is one of the essential metals of modern civilization. Native copper 
is found in copper veins but copper sulfides are the principal source 
ores of the metal. 
 
Cordierite 
Cordierite has the formulae Mg2Al4Si5O18. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is found as an accessory mineral in granite, gneiss, schists, and in 
contact metamorphic zones. Transparent specimens of good colour have been 
used as a gem. 
 
Corundum 
Corundum has the formulae Al2O3. 
It has a relative hardness of 9. 
It is common as an accessory mineral in metamorphic rocks and as an 
original constituent of certain igneous rocks. Color differences give 
rise to several varieties of gem, notably, ruby and saphire. The deep red 
ruby is one of the most valuable gems, second only to emerald and 
diamond.  
 
Covellite 
Covellite has the formulae CuS. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It has an indigo-blue colour. Not an abundant material but is found in 
most copper deposits, usually as a coating in the zone of sulfide 
enrichment. 
 
Cristobalite 
Cristobalite has the formulae SiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is present in many siliceous volcanic rocks as a lining in cavities. 
Upon heating to 1470 C it becomes nearly transparent. On cooling it 
assumes its initial white translucent appearance.  
 
Crocoite 
Crocoite has the formulae PbCrO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a rare mineral found in the oxidized zones of lead deposits where 
lead veins have traversed rocks containing chromite. Not abundant enough 
to be of commercial value although it does contain chromium. Name is 
Greek and means 'saffron', an allusion to the colour.  
 
Cross-stone 
see "Harmotome" 
 
Cryolite 
Cryolite has the formulae Na3AlF. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It often found enclosing brown siderite and grey galena. Always occurs in 
pegmatites where it's probably a precipitate from flouride rich 
solutions. Used in the manufacture of sodium salts, certain kinds of 
glass and porcelain, and as a flux for cleaning metal surfaces. 
 
Crystal 
Crystal refers to a solid mineral having a regular geometric shape and 
bounded by smooth flat surfaces(called crystal faces). 
 
Crystal symmetry 
Crystal symmetry refers to the repetitive pattern of crystal faces caused 
by the orderly internal arrangements of atoms within a mineral. 
 
Cubic Nitre 
Cubic Nitre (sodium nitrate, Chili Saltpetre) is a mineral found mainly 
in the Tarapaca district of Chile.  
 
Cuprite 
Cuprite has the formulae Cu2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is an important ore of copper. Found in the upper oxidized portions of 
copper veins. Commonly found in crystal forms.  
 
Danburite 
Danburite has the formulae CaB2Si2O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 7.  
 
Datolite 
Datolite has the formulae CaBSiO4(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a mineral of secondary origin found usually in cavities in basalt 
lavas and similar rocks.  
 
Delvauxite 
Delvauxite is a mineral source of phosphate. It has a relative hardness 
of 2.5. 
 
Destinezite 
Destinezite is a mineral. It is a source of phosphate. It has a relative 
hardness of 3. 
 
Detrital sediment 
Detrital sediment refers to deposited rock and mineral fragments. 
 
Diamond 
Diamond has the formulae C. 
It has a relative hardness of 10. 
It is the hardest naturally occuring mineral and the most important of 
the gem stones. Occurs in pale shades of several colours, deep shades are 
rare. Gem quality diamond is transparent, of attractive colour, and 
without internal fractures or inclusions of other materials. 
 
Diaspore 
Diaspore has the formulae AlO(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a constituent of bauxites and a major source of aluminum. 
 
Dike 
Dike refers to a wall-like body of igneous rock that cuts across layers 
of surrounding rocks. 
 
Diopside 
Diopside has the formulae CaMgSi2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is usually found as a contact metamorphic mineral in crystalline 
limestones. Transparent varieties have been cut and used as gemstones.  
 
Dioptase 
Dioptase has the formulae CuSiO2(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is found in the oxidation zone of copper deposits, in cavities of 
massive copper minerals. 
 
Dolomite 
Dolomite has the formulae CaMg(CO3)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It's powder reacts vigorously with HCl. A potential ore of magnesium. 
Occurs in widely extended rock masses as dolomitic limestone. Often 
intimately mixed with calcite. Formed from ordinary limestone by the 
replacement of calcium by magnesium.  
 
Dumortierite 
Dumortierite has the formulae Al7(BO3)(SiO4)3O3. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It often has a bright colour and fibrous habit. Occurs in metamorphic 
rocks rich in aluminum. Also in pegmatites and contact metamorphic rocks. 
 
Dysodile 
Dysodile is a yellow or green foliated mineral found in limestone.  
 
Emerald 
Emerald is a green precious stone variety of the mineral beryl. 
 
Enargite 
Enargite has the formulae Cu3AsS4. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a relatively rare mineral found in vein and replacement deposits 
associated with pyrite, shpalerite, bornite, galena, chalcocite. Used as 
an ore of copper. 
 
Enstatite 
Enstatite has the formulae Mg2Si2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a common and widespread mineral. Found in mafic plutonic and 
vocanic rocks and often in both metallic and stony meteorites. 
 
Epidote 
Epidote has the formulae Ca2(Al,Fe)3Si3O12(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a common mineral. Found in regional and metamorphic rocks of mafic 
composition and as a product of alteration of other minerals. Sometimes 
used as a gemstone. 
 
Epsomite 
Epsomite has the formulae MgSO47H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It has a bitter salty taste; dissolves easily in water. Occurs in 
delicate fibrous and capillary aggregates. Often called 'epsom salt'. 
Found as an efflorescent deposit on the walls of caves and sometimes in 
lake deposits. 
 
Erythrite 
Erythrite has the formulae Co3(AsO4)28H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It often shows a vivid colour and occurs in thin crusts. An important 
indicator of cobalt mineral deposits.  
 
Euclase 
Euclase has the formulae BeAlSiO4(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is a variety of berly. 
 
Feldspar 
Feldspar refers to a group of minerals containing aluminum and silica. 
They all show good cleavage in two directions at about 90 degrees. The 
hardness is about 6 and the specific gravity between 2.5 - 2.8. 
 
Ferberite 
Ferberite has the formulae FeWO4 - MnWO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is the chief ore of tungsten. A rare mineral found usually in 
pegmatite dikes and high-temperature quartz veins associated with 
granites. 
 
Ferruginous 
Ferruginous refers to containing iron.  
 
Fire-Garnet 
see "Pyrope" 
 
Flint 
Flint is a compact mineral of fine grained silica. It is a variety of 
quartz. 
 
Flow banding 
Flow banding refers to a structure sometimes found in volcanic rocks 
where alternating layers of rock have different mineral compositions.  
 
Fluorine 
Fluorine is a non-metallic element occurring naturally. 
 
Fluorite 
Fluorite has the formulae CaF2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is found in veins where it's the main mineral or with metallic ores, 
especially lead and silver. Common in dolomites and limestone. Associated 
with many different minerals. Used chiefly as a flux in the making of 
steel, also for enameling, and it's used in the preparation of 
hydroflouric acid.  
 
Fluorspar 
Fluorspar is a natural mineral containing flourine. 
 
Foliation 
Foliation refers to a layered structure present in some metamorphic rocks 
which results from the segregation of different minerals into roughly 
parallel layers.  
 
Franklinite 
Franklinite has the formulae (Zn,Mn,Fe)(Fe,Mn)2O4 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is used as an ore of zinc and manganese. With minor exceptions, the 
mineral is confined to Franklin, New Jersey.  
 
Freibergite 
Freibergite is a variety of tetrahedrite containing between 28 and 36 
percent silver. 
 
Friable 
Friable refers to crumbles or is pulverized easily. 
 
Galena 
Galena has the formulae PbS. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is virtually the only source of lead and an important ore of silver. 
Its a very common metallic mineral. When found in veins that show a 
connection to igneous rocks, it is frequently found with silver minerals. 
Galena is also found in limestones either as veins or as a replacement 
deposit. 
 
Garnet 
Garnet has the formulae A3B2(SiO4)3. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is a widely distributed group with several minerals. Found in both 
metamorphic and igneous rocks. Its chief use is as an inexpensive gem 
stone. Much is used as an abrasive materal. 
 
Garnierite 
Garnierite has the formulae (Ni,Mg)6Si4O10(OH)8. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is an ore of nickel. It's probably formed as an alteration of nickel 
bearing peridotites. Has a nice apple green colour. 
 
Glauberite 
Glauberite has the formulae Na2Ca(SO4)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It has a bitter salty taste; dissolves slowly in water. Is a sedimentary 
mineral formed by the evaporation of saline water. Slowly alters to 
gypsum when exposed to air.  
 
Glauconite 
Glauconite has the formulae (K,Na)(Al,Fe,Mg)2(Al,Si)4O10(OH)2 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is of marine origin and found in sedimentary deposits of various 
kinds. Similar to a mineral called celadonite. Used in the textile, 
sugar, and brewing industries; as a colouring agent and in the 
manufacture of fertilizers. 
 
Glaucophane 
Glaucophane has the formulae Na2(Mg,Fe)3Al2Si8O22(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It often has a blue colour. A sodium rich rock forming mineral which, 
like other amphiboles, is poor in silica. Of interest to petrologists in 
helping to define the metamorphic conditions which formed the surrounding 
rock. 
 
Gneiss 
Gneiss refers to a coarsely foliated (layered) metamorphic rock.  
 
Goethite 
Goethite has the formulae FeO(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an ore of iron and a common mineral. Usually formed as a weathering 
product of iron bearing minerals. The term "limonite" is commonly used 
for earthy yellow and brown goethite.  
 
Gold 
Gold has the formulae Au. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a rare element but occurs in nature in widely distributed small 
amounts. The main source of gold is in gold-quartz veins where gold was 
deposited from mineral bearing solutions. When the veins weather, the 
gold is separated from the quartz and mechanically settles on the stream 
floor as a placer deposit.  
 
Granite 
Granite is a plutonic igneous rock containing a high proportion of 
silica.  
 
Graphite 
Graphite has the formulae C. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is pure carbon and often confused with the heavier molybdenite. Formed 
from organic materials or by the presence of hydrocarbons in a 
metamorphic region. Used in the manufacture of crucibles, as a lubricant 
when mixed with oils, as 'lead' for pencils when mixed with clay. Feels 
greasy. 
 
Greasy 
Greasy refers to a luster of a mineral which appears to be covered with 
thin coat of oil. 
 
Greenockite 
Greenockite has the formulae CdS. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is the most common mineral containing cadmium but found in few places 
and usually as an earthy coating on zinc ores. The largest use of cadmium 
is for electroplating other metals to form chemical resistant coatings. 
 
Gypsum 
Gypsum has the formulae CaSO42H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is a common mineral distributed in sedimentary rocks, often as thick 
beds. Usually found under beds of rock salt as it's one of the first 
minerals to crystallize from evaporated salt waters. Used in the 
production of plaster of Paris.  
 
Habit 
Habit refers to the physical form of a crystal. It's determined by the 
shape and relative proportions of the crystal faces. 
 
Haematite 
Haematite is an iron ore. 
 
Halides 
Halides refers to a group of minerals that are mostly compounds of 
halogen elements (bromine, chlorine, flourine, iodine). Ex: halite, 
flourite.  
 
Halite 
Halite has the formulae NaCl. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is common salt. Tastes salty and exhibits lusterless cubic crystals.  
 
Hardness 
Hardness refers to hardness is the resistance of a smooth surface to 
scratching. It's determined by the binding force of atoms within the 
crystal structure. Moh's scale of hardness: 1)talc 2)gypsum 3)calcite 
4)flourite 5)apatite 6)orthoclase 7)quartz 8)topaz 9)corundum 10)diamond. 
 
Harmotome 
Harmotome has the formulae (Ba,K)(Al,Si)2Si6O166H20. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It occurs mostly in volcanic rocks, especially basalt. 
 
Hausmannite 
Hausmannite has the formulae Mn2O4 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an excellent ore of manganese.  
 
Hauyne 
Hauyne has the formulae (Na,Ca)4-8(Al6Si6)O24(SO4,S)1-2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is of interest to collectors. Occurs in igneous and volcanic rocks.  
 
Hematite 
Hematite has the formulae Fe2O3. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is the most abundant and important ore or iron. Has been found in 
enormous deposits in the United States and elsewhere. Many samples are 
soft as the hematite is sedimentary or weathered iron oxide and the true 
hardness is not being measured.  
 
Hemimorphite 
Hemimorphite has the formulae Zn4Si2O7(OH)2H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is an ore of zinc. Found in the oxidized regions of zinc deposits. 
 
Heulandite 
Heulandite has the formulae (Na,Ca)4-6Al6(Al,Si)4Si26O7224H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is found in the cavities of basic igneous rocks and often associated 
with calcite.  
 
Hexagonal 
Hexagonal refers to a six sided crystal with hexagonal bases. An 
unsharpened pencil is a basic example. 
 
Horn Silver 
Horn Silver is a native chloride of silver, so called because when fused 
it assumes a horny appearance. 
 
Hornblende 
Hornblende has the formulae (Ca,Na)2-3(Mg,Fe,Al)5(Al,Si)8O22(OH)2 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a common member of the amphibole group. Told from pyroxene by 
cleavage. Found in igneous and metamorphic rocks.  
 
Hydrothermal 
Hydrothermal refers to the alteration of minerals or rocks by super-
heated mineral rich fluids, usually water, within a crystallizing magma.  
 
Hydrozincite 
Hydrozincite has the formulae Zn5(CO3)2(OH)6. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is found mainly in deposits associated with smithsonite and occurs as 
a result of the oxidation of zinc bearing minerals. A major ore of zinc 
if found in economic quantities.  
 
Ilmenite 
Ilmenite has the formulae FeTiO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It has weak magnetism. The major ore of titanium and a common accessory 
mineral in plutonic rocks. Also in metamorphic rocks. Occurs concentrated 
in black sands. Associated with magnetite. 
 
Intermediate rock 
Intermediate rock refers to an igneous rock that is transitional between 
acidic and basic rocks. Have a silica content between 54-65%.  
 
Iron 
Iron has the formulae Fe. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is is recovered primarily from iron bearing minerals. Iron is 
recognizable by the oxide coating on its surface. 
 
Isometric 
Isometric refers to cubic. Three axis, all the same length and at right 
angles to each other. 
 
Jade 
Jade is a group of glassy silicate minerals including jadetite and 
nephrite.  
 
Jadeite 
Jadeite has the formulae Na(Al,Fe+3)Si2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is long prized in the Orient where its been used to make beautiful 
ornaments. Occurs in large masses in serpentine. Transparent and 
translucent varieties are called jade. 
 
Jasper 
Jasper has the formulae SiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a form of quartz usually coloured red from inclusions of hematite. 
 
Jet 
Jet is a soft black mineral.  
 
Kaolinite 
Kaolinite has the formulae Al2Si2O5(OH)4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It has a crumbly habit. One of the common members of the group called 
clay. Derived from the decomposition of feldspars, particulary aluminum 
silicates. One of the most important of the natural industrial 
substances, it is used for bricks, ceramics, and many other applications. 
 
Kernite 
Kernite has the formulae Na2B4O74H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a major ore of boron. Formed in playa lakes with the boron supplied 
by thermal springs passing through the underlying volcanic rock.  
 
Kimberlite 
Kimberlite is an igneous rock containing very little silica.  
 
Kyanite 
Kyanite has the formulae Al2SiO5. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It has a different hardness in two directions. An accessory mineral in 
gneiss and mica schist. It often found with garnet and corundum. Used in 
the production of refractory porcelains. 
 
Labradorite 
Labradorite has the formulae (Na,Ca)AlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is one of the plagioclase feldspars, also known as soda-lime 
feldspars. Others in the grouping are: albite, oligoclase, andesine, 
bytownite, and anorthite. Labradorite often has a beautiful display of 
colours. The name is derived from the locality of Labrador. 
 
Lamellar 
Lamellar refers to composed of thin layers, scales, or plates 
 
Lapis lazuli 
Lapis lazuli is a blue mineral used in the manufacture of ultramarine 
pigment.  
 
Laumontite 
Laumontite has the formulae Ca(Al2Si4)O124H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It shows a powdery white surface. A form of anaclime (or analcite). 
Characterized by the fact that it is monoclinic. 
 
Lazulite 
Lazulite has the formulae MgAl2(PO4)2(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a rare mineral and a minor gem stone. Usually found in quartzites 
associated with kyanite, andalusite, corundum and rutile. Name derived 
from the Arabic word for 'heaven' in regard to the mineral's colour.  
 
Lazurite 
Lazurite has the formulae (Na,Ca)8(Al,Si)12O24(S,SO4). 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is usually shows a deep blue colour. The greenish variety is called 
lapis lazuli and is very rare. Found in metamorphic limestones associated 
with calcite and pyrite. 
 
Lenticular 
Lenticular refers to have a lens-like shape.  
 
Lepidolite 
Lepidolite has the formulae K(Li,Al)3(Si,Al)4O10(F,OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a relatively rare mineral found in pegmatic dikes and usually 
associated with lithium bearing minerals such as pink and green 
tourmaline. Often found intergrown with muscovite. Used as a source of 
lithium and it's used in the manufacture of heat resistant glass.  
 
Leucite 
Leucite has the formulae KAlSi2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a rather rare mineral occuring only in igneous rocks and usually in 
recent lavas. Found in rocks where the amount of silica in the magma was 
not sufficient to form feldspar. It is not found, therefore, in rocks 
that contain quartz. From the Greek word for 'white'.  
 
Lime 
Lime is the common name of calcium oxide. 
 
Limestone 
Limestone is a sedimentary rock composed of calcium carbonate.  
 
Limonite 
Limonite is an iron ore found in bog deposits. It has a relative hardness 
of 5.5. 
 
Luster 
Luster refers to the general look of a mineral in reflected light. 
Minerals are divided into two types: metallic and non-metallic. There's 
no clear dividing line between the two. In general, non-metallic minerals 
will transmit light through a thin edge, are light coloured, and will 
have a light or colourless streak. Non-metallic minerals are further 
described as: vitreous, resinous, pearly, greasy, silky, adamantine.  
 
Magma 
Magma refers to molten rock beneath the earth's crust. It solidifies to 
form igneous rocks. 
 
Magnesite 
Magnesite has the formulae MgCo3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It has been used as an ore of metallic magnesium but the primary source 
of magnesium is sea water. Is a source of magnesia for industrial 
chemicals. Commonly found in veins and masses derived from the alteration 
of serpentine through the action of waters containing carbonic acid. 
 
Magnetite 
Magnetite has the formulae Fe3O4. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is the richest and most important ore of iron. Found as an accessory 
mineral in most igneous rocks. Highly magnetic.  
 
Malachite 
Malachite has the formulae Ci2(CO3)(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a widely distributed copper ore. Found in the oxidized portions of 
copper veins and is often associated with azurite, cuprite, native 
copper, iron oxides, and sulfides of copper and iron. Often occurs in 
copper veins that are found in limestone.  
 
Manganite 
Manganite has the formulae MnO(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is strongly magnetic. An ore of manganese but seldom found in 
commercial quantities. Often found in veins associated with granitic 
igneous rocks. Alters to pyrolusite. Barite and calcite are frequent 
associates. 
 
Marble 
Marble is metamorphosed limestone.  
 
Marcasite 
Marcasite has the formulae FeS2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It often shows a white colour on a fresh surface. Found in iron metallic 
veins and frequently with lead and zinc ores. Also found in sedimentary 
rocks. Marcasite most frequently occurs as a replacement deposit in 
limestone and often in concretions imbedded in clays, marls, and shales. 
 
Margarite 
Margarite has the formulae CaAl2(Al2Si2))O10(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a metamorphic mineral associated with staurolite and tourmaline.  
 
Massive 
Massive refers to a mineral that does not show any definite external 
crystal form or consists of poorly defined masses of small crystals. 
 
Mercury 
Mercury has the formulae Hg. 
It has a relative hardness of 0. 
It is a native metal. Has uses in mining, engineering, and pharmacy.  
 
Mica 
Mica refers to a group of silicate minerals having perfect cleavage in 
one direction and which easily split into thin, elastic, sheets. 
 
Microcrystalline 
Microcrystalline refers to a rock in which the crystals are too small to 
be seen without a microscope.  
 
Microline 
Microline has the formulae KAlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It has the same composition as orthoclase but distinguished by triclinic 
twinning (usually requires a microscope). If a feldspar is a deep green 
it is microline - and sometimes called 'amazon stone'. Told from 
plagioclase by lack of striations.  
 
Millerite 
Millerite has the formulae NiS. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is the richest ore of nickel but too scattered to be commercially 
important. Forms at low temperatures often in cavities and as an altered 
form of other nickel minerals, or as a crystal inclusion in other 
minerals.  
 
Mimetite 
Mimetite has the formulae Pb5(AsO4)3Cl. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a minor ore of lead. A relatively rare which occurs in the oxidized 
portions of lead bearing veins.  
 
Mohs 
Mohs is a scale of hardness applied to minerals. It ranges from 1 for 
talc to diamond at 10.  
 
Molybdates 
Molybdates refers to a group of minerals in which the molybdate radical 
(MoO4) is an important constituent. Ex: wulfenite 
 
Molybdenite 
Molybdenite has the formulae MoS2. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is the main ore of molybdenum. Resembles graphite but has a higher 
specific gravity and a slight blue tint.  
 
Monazite 
Monazite has the formulae (Ca,La,Nd,Th)PO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is the chief ore of thorium and cerium. Thorium is a radioactive 
element. It is concentrated in sands due to its durability and high 
specific gravity. Associated with other heavy minerals such as magnetite, 
rutile, and zircon.  
 
Monoclinic 
Monoclinic refers to a crystal with six faces and three axes of unequal 
length. Two axes are at right angles to each other and the third is 
inclined to the plane of the other two. A ream of paper with a long edge 
sloped at an angle is an example.  
 
Mud 
Mud is a mixture of clay, sand and organic matter.  
 
Muscovite 
Muscovite has the formulae KAl2(AlSi3)O10(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It has extremely perfect cleavage and thin flakes are flexible. Very 
common. Used for electrical and heat insulation.  
 
Natrolite 
Natrolite has the formulae Na2(Al2Si3)O102H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is of interest to collectors. Found lining cavities in basalts and 
other lavas. Associated with calcite and zeolites. 
 
Nephiline 
Nephiline has the formulae (Na,K)AlSiO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is confined almost exclusively to the zinc deposits at Franklin, NJ. 
Associated with franklinite and willemite, often in an intimate mixture.  
 
Niccolite 
Niccolite has the formulae NiAs. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a minor ore of nickel and often has a copper-like colour. 
 
Nodular 
Nodular refers to appearing as or composed of irregular lumps of rock or 
a mineral. 
 
Oligoclase 
Oligoclase has the formulae (Na,Ca)AlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a plagioclase feldspar. Of interest to petrologists and collectors. 
Varieties: labradorite, anorthite. 
 
Olivine 
Olivine has the formulae (Mg,Fe)2SiO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It's name is derived from the characteristic olive green colour. A common 
rock forming mineral. A clear green variety is called peridot and has 
some uses as a gem. 
 
Onyx 
Onyx is a mineral formed of silica. 
 
Opal 
Opal has the formulae SiO2nH2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is found lining and filling cavities in igneous and sedimentary rocks 
where it's been deposited by hot waters. The ordinary varieties are 
common but the precious varieties are quite valuable.  
 
Orpiment 
Orpiment has the formulae As2S3. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is a rare mineral usually associated with realgar. Used in dyeing but 
is poisonous. Distinguished from sulfur by its perfect cleavage. 
 
Orthoclase 
Orthoclase has the formulae KAlSi3O8. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is used in the manufacture of porcelin and for other industrial 
purposes. 
 
Orthorhombic 
Orthorhombic refers to a rectangular crystal with three axes of different 
lengths and all at right angles to each other. A closed book is a basic 
example.  
 
Oxide 
Oxide refers to a group of minerals where oxygen joined with a metal is a 
major constituent.  
 
Oxidized zone 
Oxidized zone refers to the portion of an ore body that has been altered 
by downward percolating groundwater and which contains dissolved oxygen 
and carbon dioxide.  
 
Pearly 
Pearly refers to a luster with the iridescent look of a pearl. Most 
commonly seen on surfaces parallel to cleavage planes.  
 
Pectolite 
Pectolite has the formulae NaCa2Si3O8(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is formed from hydrothermal solutions filling cavities in basalts. 
Associated with zeolites, prehnite, calcite. Of interest to collectors. 
 
Pegmatite 
Pegmatite refers to an igneous rock of very coarse grain size. Usually 
found as dikes within a larger rock mass. They are often excellent 
sources of fine crystals. 
 
Penninite 
Penninite has the formulae Mg3(Si4O10)(OH)2Mg3(OH)6. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a member of the chlorite group of minerals.  
 
Pentlandite 
Pentlandite has the formulae (Fe,Ni)9S8. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is the principal ore of nickel. The major use of nickel is in the 
manufacture of steel.  
 
Perlite 
A perlite is an obsidian, or other vitreous rock with a concentric 
structure and which is expansible by heating.  
 
Petalite 
Petalite has the formulae LiAlSi4O10. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is an ore of lithium. Associated with spodumene, lepidolite, 
tourmaline.  
 
Petroleum 
Petroleum is a mineral oil from which petrol is derived.  
 
Phenakite 
Phenakite has the formulae Be2SiO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is a rare mineral found in pegmatite dikes associated with topaz, 
beryl, and apatite. From the Greek word for 'a deceiver' in that it can 
be mistaken for quartz. 
 
Phillipsite 
Phillipsite has the formulae (K2,Na2Ca)(Al2Si4)O124-5H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a hydrothermal mineral found lining cavities in basalt rocks 
associated with chabazite. Formed as an alteration product of feldspars 
and volcanic ashes.  
 
Phlogopite 
Phlogopite has the formulae K(Mg,Fe)3(AlSi3)O10(F,OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It occurs as a result of the metamorphism of crystalline magnesium 
limestones or dolomitic marbles. Also found in serpentine. Rarely found 
in igneous rocks. 
 
Phosphates 
Phosphates refers to a group of minerals where phosphate (PO4) is an 
important constituent. 
 
Pipe 
Pipe refers to a cylindrical, vertical mass of igneous rock.  
 
Placer 
Placer refers to a concentrated deposit of mineral particles that have 
weathered out of rock. Usually deposited by stream action. 
 
Plagioclase 
Plagioclase has the formulae Na(AlSi3O8). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is the plagioclase feldspar group includes: albite, oligoclase, 
andesine, labradorite, bytownite, anorthite.  
 
Platinum 
Platinum has the formulae Pt. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a rare metal and more valuable than gold. Has a high melting point 
and is resistant to chemicals.  
 
Playa 
Playa refers to a shallow basin or plain in a desert where water collects 
after a rain and then evaporates. 
 
Plutonic rock 
Plutonic rock refers to a granular igneous rock that has solidified at 
great depth and shows a distinct grain structure. Ex: granite  
 
Polybasite 
Polybasite has the formulae (Ag,Cu)16SbS11. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an ore of silver. Resembles hematite but much softer.  
 
Polyhalite 
Polyhalite has the formulae KaCa2Mg(SO4)42H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is urce of potassium. Occurs in bedded deposits associated with 
sylvite, carnallite, halite. Has a characteristic red colour. 
 
Potash 
Potash is the name given to any mineral containing potassium. 
 
Prase 
Prase is a dark green variety of quartz, the colour being due to an 
admixture of hornblende.  
 
Precipitation 
Precipitation refers to the process by which disolved or suspended solids 
are separated from a liquid.  
 
Prehnite 
Prehnite has the formulae Ca2Al2Si3O10(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It occurs as a crusty lining in cavities in basalt and related rocks. 
Associated with zeolites, datolite, pectolite, and calcite. Has a 
characteristic green colour. Resembles hemimorphite but is of lower 
specific gravity and fuses easily.  
 
Proustite 
Proustite has the formulae Ag3AsS3. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an ore of silver. Has a characteristic ruby-red colour, vermilion 
streak and a brilliant luster. 
 
Pseudomorph 
Pseudomorph refers to a mineral that has taken the outward crystal form 
of a different mineral. 
 
Psilomelane 
Psilomelane has the formulae BaMnO16(OH)4 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an ore of manganese. Usually occurs with pyrolusite. Different from 
other manganese oxides in that it is of greater hardness and has an 
apparent lack of crystal structure.  
 
Pumice 
Pumice is a light volcanic rock.  
 
Purpurite 
Purpurite has the formulae (Mn,Fe)PO4 . 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is an alteration product of lithiophilite that occurs in pegmatites. 
Of interest to collectors. 
 
Pyragyrite 
Pyragyrite has the formulae Ag3SbS3. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an ore of silver. Similar to proustite but has a deeper red colour 
and is less translucent. Forms in silver veins formed at low temperatures 
and is one of the last minerals to crystallize in the process of 
deposition. 
 
Pyrite 
Pyrite has the formulae FeS2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is iron pyrite. Formed from cooling magma. It is found as an igneous 
segregation and also in metamorphic rocks and as vein deposits. Often 
found in sedimentary rocks being both primary and secondary in origin. 
Often mined for the gold or silver associated with it.  
 
Pyrolusite 
Pyrolusite has the formulae MnO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is the major ore of manganese which is used in the manufacture of 
steel. Pyrolusite is formed when manganese is dissolved out of 
crystalline rocks and then redeposited in dentrites etc. 
 
Pyromorphite 
Pyromorphite has the formulae Pb5(PO4)3Cl. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a minor ore of lead which is found in the oxidized portions of lead 
veins.  
 
Pyrope 
Pyrope (fire-garnet, Bohemian garnet) is a dark-red variety of garnet 
found embedded in trap tufa in the mountains of Bohemia, and in 
serpentine in Germany.  
 
Pyrophyllite 
Pyrophyllite has the formulae A12Si4O10(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is appears very similar to talc. A comparatively rare mineral found in 
metamorphic rocks and often with kyanite.  
 
Pyroxenes 
Pyroxenes refers to a group of closely related and dark coloured rock 
forming minerals. Ex: augite, diopside. 
 
Pyrrhotite 
Pyrrhotite has the formulae FeS. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is magnetic. A common mineral often found in igneous rocks. It is 
mined for the nickel minerals associated with it.  
 
Quartz 
Quartz has the formulae -SiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a very widespread mineral which occurs as an important constituent 
of igneous rocks which have an excess of silica. Very resistant to 
mechanical and chemical attack. Massive, fine grained types are called 
jasper, chert, flint, agate. Coarse crystalline types called amethyst, 
rose quartz etc. 
 
Realgar 
Realgar has the formulae AsS. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is found in veins of lead, silver, and gold ores associated with 
arsenic minerals and stibnite. Also occurs as a deposit from hot springs. 
When mixed with saltpeter and burned it gives a bright white light and 
was used in fireworks.  
 
Red Ochre 
Red Ochre is a soft, earthy variety of haematite mineral. 
 
Replacement 
Replacement refers to the process by which one mineral is replaced by 
another and the original physical form is often retained. 
 
Resinous 
Resinous refers to a luster with the appearance of resin. 
 
Rhodochrosite 
Rhodochrosite is an important manganese ore. In South America it is used 
as an ornamental stone. It has a relative hardness of 4. 
 
Rhodocrosite 
Rhodocrosite has the formulae MnCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is a minor ore of manganese. Occurs in veins with ores of silver, 
lead, copper, and other manganese minerals.  
 
Rhodonite 
Rhodonite has the formulae (Mn,Fe,Mg)SiO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It often has a pink-red colour. Sometimes polished for use as an 
ornamental stone. Of interest to collectors. 
 
Rhyolite 
Rhyolite is a fine grained igneous rock.  
 
Ruby 
Ruby is the red transparent form of corundum. It is a precious stone. 
 
Rutile 
Rutile has the formulae -TiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It exhibits a strong luster and often twinned crystals. Found in granite, 
granite pegmatites, gneiss, mica schist, metamorphic limestone and 
dolomite. Present as an accessory mineral in the rocks or in quartz 
veins. Name is derived from the latin word "rutilus"; red.  
 
Sapphire 
Sapphire is the blue transparent form of corundum.  
 
Scapolite 
Scapolite has the formulae (Na,Ca,K)4A13(Al,Si)3Si6O24(Cl,SO4,CO3). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It shows fluorescence. Occurs in the crystalline schists, gneisses, and 
often is probably derived from the alteration of plagioclase feldspars. 
Also occurs in crystalline limestones formed by metamorphic contact or 
igneous intrusion. Associated with diopside, amphibole, garnet, apatite, 
and zircon.  
 
Scheelite 
Scheelite has the formulae CaWO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is an ore of tungsten. Found in granite pegmatites, contact 
metamorphic deposits and high-temperature ore veins associated with 
granitic rocks. Associated with cassiterite, topaz, flourite, apatite, 
molybdenite, and wolframite. Sometimes found with gold.  
 
Schist 
Schist refers to a metamorphic rock which exhibits fine lamination or 
layers along which the rock may be easily broken. Mica is a good example. 
 
Schwazite 
Schwazite is a variety of Tetrahedrite containing upto 17 percent 
mercury.  
 
Scolecite 
Scolecite has the formulae Ca(Al2Si3)O103H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is of interest to collectors. Found in lavas and contact metamorphic 
depostis. 
 
Scorodite 
Scorodite has the formulae FeAsO42H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is of interest to collectors. Occurs in the oxidized portions of 
metallic veins as an alteration of arsenic containing minerals.  
 
Secondary minerals 
Secondary minerals refers to minerals formed by the alteration of 
preexisting minerals. 
 
Sepiolite 
Sepiolite has the formulae Mg4Si6O15(OH)26H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is an alteration product of magnesite and serpentine. Becomes plastic 
when mixed with water. Used in the manufacture of meerschaum pipes. 
 
Serpentine 
Serpentine has the formulae Mg6(Si4O10)(OH)8. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a common mineral group and usually an alteration product of some 
magnesium silicate, especially olivine, pyroxene, and amphibole. 
Frequently associated with magnesite, chromite, and magnetite. Two 
varieties are antigorite(massive) and chrysotile(fibrous; also called 
asbestos).  
 
Shale 
Shale is a fine black sedimentary rock. 
 
Siderite 
Siderite has the formulae FeCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is becomes magnetic when heated. An ore of iron. Frequently found as 
an impure admixture with clay materials. Also in concretions with 
concentric layers.  
 
Silica 
Silica refers to silicon dioxide (SiO2). A very common mineral that is 
found in many forms including quartz, opal, chert. 
 
Silicates 
Silicates refers to a group of minerals composed chiefly of SiO4. Ex: 
quartz, orthoclase. 
 
Silky 
Silky refers to a silk-like luster on a mineral. Results from a fine, 
fibrous and parallel surface. 
 
Sillimanite 
Sillimanite has the formulae A;2SiO5. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a somewhat rare mineral found as a constituent of gneiss and schist 
in metamorhpic rocks. Often occurs with corundum.  
 
Silver 
Silver has the formulae Ag. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is native silver results from the deposition of silver from 
hydrothermal solutions. Most of the world's silver comes from silver ores 
rather than pure native silver. 
 
Skutterudite 
Skutterudite has the formulae CoAs2-3. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an important ore of cobalt and nickel. Associated with native 
silver, bismuth, calcite, arsenopyrite. 
 
Slate 
Slate is a metamorphic rock.  
 
Smithsonite 
Smithsonite has the formulae ZnCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an ore of zinc. Usually found with zinc deposits in limestone beds.  
 
Sodalite 
Sodalite has the formulae Na4Al3(SiO4)3Cl. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is usually has an attractive blue colour. Used as polished slabs and 
for carved ornaments. 
 
Specific gravity 
Specific gravity refers to the relative density of a mineral. It is the 
ratio of:; Weight in Air/(Weigth in Air - Weight in Water). ;This 
measurement is an easily accomplished procedure using a simple balance or 
spring scale. 
 
Sperrylite 
Sperrylite has the formulae PtAs2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a rare natural compound of platinum and arsenic.  
 
Sphalerite 
Sphalerite has the formulae (Zn,Fe)S. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is the main ore of zinc. Associated with galena, pyrite, marcasite, 
chalcopyrite, calcite. Formed as a replacement deposit in limestones and 
in veins in igneous rocks. 
 
Sphene 
Sphene has the formulae CaTiO(SiO4). 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a source of titanium. A rather common accessory mineral in igneous 
rocks. Often found as crystals. Commonly associated with chlorite. 
 
Spinel 
Spinel has the formulae MgAl2O4. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is a common metamorphic mineral occuring imbedded in crystalline 
limestone, gneisses, and serpentine. Occurs as a common accessory mineral 
in many dark igneous rocks. When transparent and finely coloured it is 
used as a gem. 
 
Spodumene 
Spodumene has the formulae LiAlSi2O6. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is a source of lithium. Found occasionaly as very large crystals in 
pegmatic dikes. 
 
Staurolite 
Staurolite has the formulae (Fe,Mg,Zn)2Al9Si4O23(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is an accessory mineral in crystalline schists, slates, and sometimes 
gneisses. Often associated with garnet, kyanite, and tourmaline. May form 
cross twins.  
 
Stephanite 
Stephanite has the formulae Ag5SbS4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a minor ore of silver. One of the last minerals to form in silver 
veins.  
 
Stibnite 
Stibnite has the formulae Sb2S3. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is the major ore of antimony. Deposited by alkaline waters, usually in 
association with quartz. Found in quartz veins or beds in granite and 
gneiss. May occur as a replacement in limestones and shales.  
 
Stilbite 
Stilbite has the formulae NaCa2(Al5Si13)O3614H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a mineral of seconadary origin found in cavities in basalts and 
related rocks.  
 
Strata 
Strata is layers of sedimentary rock. 
 
Streak 
Streak refers to the colour of the powder produced when a mineral is 
rubbed over the surface of a piece of unglazed, white porcelain. 
 
Striations 
Striations refers to very small parallel grooves or narrow channels of 
the faces of a crystal.  
 
Strontianite 
Strontianite has the formulae SrCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is source of strontium. Physically simialar to cerussite and 
witherite. Associated with barite, celestite, and calcite in veins in 
limestone. Occasionaly found in igneous rocks and as a gangue mineral in 
sulfide veins. 
 
Sulfates 
Sulfates refers to a group of minerals in which sulfate SO4 is an 
important part. 
 
Sulfides 
Sulfides refers to a mineral group where sulfur is combined with one or 
more metals.  
 
Sulfur 
Sulfur has the formulae S. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is formed near the crater rims of volcanoes by hot gases; also formed 
by the reduction of sulfates, especially gypsum. 
 
Sulphides 
Sulphides refers to a mineral group where sulphur is combined with one or 
more metals.  
 
Sylvanite 
Sylvanite has the formulae AgAuTe4. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is a rare ore of gold, silver, and tellurium. Formed in low 
temperature hydrothermal veins. Associated with calaverite, other 
tellurides - usually in quartz gangue.  
 
Sylvite 
Sylvite has the formulae KCl. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is an industrial mineral used as a fertilizer. Found in sedimentary 
evaporite deposits associated with halite.  
 
Talc 
Talc has the formulae Mg3Si4O10(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 1. 
It is a mineral of secondary origin formed by the alteration of magnesium 
silicates. Usually found in metamorphic rocks where, in a non-crystalline 
form, it occurs as 'soapstone' - and can make up large rock masses. Used 
for laboratory table tops and for many industrial uses. Has a greasy 
feel.  
 
Tenacity 
Tenacity refers to the ability of a substance to resist being separated.  
 
Tetragonal 
Tetragonal refers to a crystal with four rectangular(not square) sides 
and two square bases. A butter package is an example.  
 
Tetrahedrite 
Tetrahedrite has the formulae (Cu,Fe)12Sb4Si3 - (Cu,Fe)12As4S13. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is an ore of copper and silver. Commonly found in hydrothermal veins 
formed at low to moderate temperatures. Usually associated with other 
silver, lead, and copper minerals.  
 
Thenardite 
Thenardite has the formulae Na2SO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It dissolves easily in water and has a weak salty taste. Forms in 
sedimentary evaporite deposits in lakes and playas of desert climates. 
Used in the glass and paper-making industries.  
 
Till 
A till is a stiff unstratified clay mixed with sand, gravel and boulders. 
 
Tillite 
A tillite is a rock composed of consolidated till.  
 
Topaz 
Topaz has the formulae Al2SiO4(F,OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is formed by flourine-bearing vapors given off during the last stages 
of the solidification of igneous rocks. It is used as gem stone. 
 
Torbernite 
Torbenite is a uranium ore. It contains up to 61 percent uranium. It has 
a relative hardness of 2.5.  
 
Tourmaline 
Tourmaline has the formulae (Na,Ca)(Al,Fe,Li,Mg)3A16(BO3)3(Si6O18) 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is most commonly found in granite pegmatites. Usually black but 
lighter coloured gem varieties are also found. 
 
Travertine 
Travertine is a white or light-coloured crystalline concretionary 
limestone deposited from springs and used for building. 
 
Tremolite 
Tremolite has the formulae Ca2Mg5Si8O22(OH)2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is the fibrous variety has been used for asbestos. The compact variety 
is called nephrite and is used for ornamental purposes by oriental 
people. Most often found in impure limestones where the rock has 
recrystallized during metamorphism.  
 
Triclinic 
Triclinic refers to a crystal with six faces as parallelograms and three 
axes of unequal length all inclined to each other. An uncommon form of 
crystal.  
 
Trydimite 
Trydimite has the formulae -SiO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is of interest to scientists and collectors due to its rarity. 
 
Tufa 
Tufa is a soft white porous rock of calcium carbonate deposited from 
solution in spring water or percolating ground water.  
 
Turquoise 
Turquoise has the formulae CuAl6(PO4)4(OH)85H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is a mineral of secondary origin usually found in small veins and 
stringers. Used as a gem stone. 
 
Twin 
Twin refers to a mineral specimen comprised of two or more single 
crystals intergrown in a systematic arrangement.  
 
Ulexite 
Ulexite has the formulae NaCaB5O98H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 2. 
It is an ore of boron. Formed during the evaporation of lake basins. 
 
Umber 
Umber is a naturally occurring mineral used as a pigment. 
 
Uraninite 
Uraninite has the formulae UO2. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is radioactive. An important source of uranium. Occurs in pegmatites 
and veins in granite; also as sedimentary deposits.  
 
Vanadinite 
Vanadinite has the formulae Pb5(VO4)3Cl. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is source of vanadium and a minor ore of lead. Found in the oxidized 
portion of lead veins associated with other lead minerals. Vanadium is 
used as a steel-hardening metal. 
 
Vein 
Vein refers to a sheetlike extension of mineral matter cutting through 
preexisting rock.  
 
Vermilion 
see "cinnaba" 
 
Vesicle 
Vesicle refers to a small cavity in a volcanic rock.  
 
Vesuvianite 
Vesuvianite has the formulae Ca10(Mg,Fe)2Al4(SiO4)5(SiO7)2(OH)4. 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is usually found in crystalline limestones and is formed as a result 
of contact metamorphism.  
 
Vitreous 
Vitreous refers to a luster like that of glass. Quartz is an example. 
 
Vivianite 
Vivianite has the formulae Fe3(PO4)28H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It is a rare mineral of secondary origin, associated with pyrite in 
copper and tin veins. Forms as a weathering product from primary iron-
manganese phosphates in pegmatites. Also found in beds of clay. 
 
Wavellite 
Wavellite has the formulae Al3(PO4)2(OH)35H2O. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a rare mineral of secondary origin. Found frequently in small 
amounts in crevices in aluminous, low-grade metamorphic rocks and in 
limonite and phosphorite deposits.  
 
Willemite 
Willemite has the formulae Zn2SiO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 6. 
It is an ore of zinc. Found in crystallized limestone. Associated with 
calcite, zincite, franklentie.  
 
Witherite 
Witherite has the formulae BaCO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 4. 
It is a somewhat rare mineral found most often in veins associated with 
galena. It's a minor source of barium. 
 
Woolastonite 
Woolastonite has the formulae CaSiO3. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is used in the manufacture of tile. Occurs mainly as a contact 
metamorphic mineral in crystalline limestones. 
 
Wulfenite 
Wulfenite has the formulae PbMoO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 3. 
It often displays brilliant colours and a tabular habit. A minor source 
of molybdenum. Found in the oxidized portion of lead veins with other 
secondary lead minerals. Prized by collectors.  
 
Zincite 
Zincite has the formulae (Zn,Mn)O. 
It has a relative hardness of 5. 
It is an ore of zinc and used in the production of zinc oxide.  
 
Zircon 
Zircon has the formulae ZrSiO4. 
It has a relative hardness of 8. 
It is a common accessory mineral found in all types of igneous rocks. 
When transparent it's used as a gemstone.  
 
Zoisite 
Zoisite has the formulae Ca2Al3(Si3O12)(OH). 
It has a relative hardness of 7. 
It is of interest to collectors. Formed in high temperature metamorphic 
rocks. Variety: tanzanite.  
  
  
MYTHOLOGY  
  
 
Abaddon 
According to the ancient Hebrews, Abaddon was chief of the demons of the 
7th hierarchy. 
 
Abaris 
In Greek mythology Abaris was a priest to the god Apollo. Apollo gave him 
a golden arrow which rendered him invisible and also cured diseases and 
gave oracles. Abaris gave the arrow to Pythagoras.  
 
Abas 
Abas was the son of Celeus and Metaneira. He mocked Demeter and was 
turned into a lizard. By some accounts he was the 12th king of Argolis 
who owned a magic shield.  
 
Abdera 
Abdera was an ancient Greek city supposedly founded by Hercules in honour 
of his friend Abderus.  
 
Abderus 
Abderus was a friend of Hercules. Hercules left him to look after the 
mare of Diomedes, which ate him.  
 
Abira 
In Antioquia mythology, Abira is the creator. 
 
Abominable snowman 
The Abominable snowman is a legendary creature, said to resemble a human, 
with long arms and a thickset body covered with reddish gray hair. 
Reports of its existence in the Himalayas have been made since 1832, and 
they gained substance from a published photograph of a huge footprint in 
the snow in 1951. No further "evidence" has been found.  
 
Absyrtus 
Absyrtus (Apsyrtus) was a son of Aeetes, King of Colchis and brother of 
Medea. When Medea fled with Jason she took Absyrtus with her and when her 
father nearly overtook them she murdered Absyrtus and cut his body into 
pieces and threw it around the road so that her father would be delayed 
picking up the pieces of his son. 
 
Acacetus 
Acacetus is a name sometimes given to Hermes because of his eloquence.  
 
Acamas 
Acamas was a son of Theseus and Phaedra. He went to Troy with Diomedes to 
demand the return of Helen. 
 
Acastus 
Acastus was a son of Pelias. He was one of the argonauts. 
 
Acestes 
In Greek mythology, Acestes was a Sicilian bowman who in a trial of skill 
discharge an arrow with such force that it ignited. 
 
Achaeus 
In Greek mythology, Achaeus was a son of Xuthus and Creusa. He returned 
to Thessaly and recovered the dominions of which his father had been 
deprived.  
 
Achates 
In Greek mythology Achates was a companion of Aeneas in his wanderings 
subsequent to his flight from Troy. He typified a faithful friend and 
companion. 
 
Achemon 
Achemon and his brother Basalas were two Cercopes who were for ever 
arguing. One day they insulted Hercules, who tied them by their feet to 
his club and marched off with them like a brace of hares. 
 
Acheron 
Acheron was one of the rivers of Hades. 
 
Acherusia 
In Greek mythology, Acherusia was a cave on the borders of Pontus which 
led to the infernal regions. It was through this cave that Hercules 
dragged Cerberus to earth.  
 
Achilles 
In Greek mythology, Achilles was the son of Peleus, king of the Myrmidons 
in Thessaly, and of the sea nymph Thetis, who rendered him invulnerable, 
except for the heel by which she held him, by dipping him in the river 
Styx. Achilles killed Hector at the climax of the Iliad, and according to 
subsequent Greek legends was himself killed by Paris, who shot a poisoned 
arrow into Achilles' heel.  
 
Achiyalatopa 
In Zuni mythology, Achiyalatopa is a celestial giant monster with 
feathers of flint knives. 
 
Achmon 
Achmon is an alternative spelling for Achemon.  
 
Acis 
In Greek mythology, Acis was a son of Faunus and a river nymph. He loved 
the sea-nymph Galatea and was killed by his jealous rival Polyphemus.  
 
Acrisius 
In Greek mythology, Acrisius was a son of Abas and the twin brother of 
Proetus with whom he quarrelled even in the womb. He was the father of 
Danae. When Abas died, Acrisius expelled Proetus from his inheritance, 
but Proetus returned supported by Iobates and Acrisius was compelled to 
give him Tiryns while he kept Argos. 
 
Actaeon 
In Greek mythology, Actaeon was a great hunter who was turned into a stag 
by Artemis for looking on her while she was bathing. He was subsequently 
torn to pieces by his own dogs.  
 
Adaro 
In the mythology of the Solomon Islands, Adaro is a sea-spirit. 
 
Addanc 
The addanc was a dwarf or marine monster which lived near lake llyon. He  
was killed in some accounts by Peredu who obtained a magic stone which 
made him invisible.  
 
Adekagagwaa 
In Iroquois mythology, Adekagagwaa is the spirit of summer who rests 
during the winter in the south.  
 
Adja 
see "Adjassou-Linguetor" 
 
Adja Bosu 
see "Adjassou-Linguetor" 
 
Adjassou-Linguetor 
In Voodoo, Adjassou-Linguetor (Adja, Adha Bosu) is a loa with 
protruberant eys and a bad temper who governs spring water. 
 
Adonis 
Adonis was a Phoenician god, adopted by Greek mythology as a mortal 
favourite of Aphrodite. He was killed by a wild boar and upon finding him 
Aphrodite caused the plant the anemone to rise from his blood.  
 
Adrastea 
Adrastea was an alternative name for Nemesis. 
 
Adrastus 
Adrastus was the son of Talaus and the king of Argos. He attempted to 
restore Polynices to his throne at Thebes, he failed but led a second 
assault leading the Epigoni. He died of grief when he heard that his son 
had been killed in the Epigoni assault.  
 
Aegir 
In Norse mythology, Aegir is the god of the sea.  
 
Aello 
Aello was one of the harpies. 
 
Aeneas 
Aeneas was a Trojan hero. He was the son of Anchises and Aphrodite. He 
led the survivors of the Trojan war to Italy.  
 
Aeolus 
Aeolus was the son of Hippotes. He lived on a rocky island where the 
winds were trapped in caves. He let the winds out as commanded by the 
gods.  
 
Aesculapius 
Aesculapius was the son of Apollo and Coronis. His mother died at his 
birth, struck by an arrow of Artemis. His father saved him and took him 
to the physician Chiron who taught Aesculapius about healing. 
 
Aesir 
The Aesir were the principal gods in Norse mythology. They lived in 
Asgard. 
 
Agamemnon 
In Greek mythology, Agamemnon was a Greek hero of the Trojan wars, son of 
Atreus, king of Mycenae, and brother of Menelaus. He married 
Clytemnestra, and their children included Electra, Iphigenia, and 
Orestes. He sacrificed Iphigenia in order to secure favorable winds for 
the Greek expedition against Troy and after a ten years' siege sacked the 
city, receiving Priam's daughter Cassandra as a prize. On his return 
home, he and Cassandra were murdered by Clytemnestra and her lover, 
Aegisthus. His children Orestes and Electra later killed the guilty 
couple. 
 
Agla 
An agla is a talisman used by the rabbis to exorcise evil spirits.  
 
Agni 
Agni is the Hindu god of fire, the guardian of homes, and the protector 
of humans against evil. 
 
Agwe 
In Voodoo, Agwe is the goddess of the sea.  
 
Ah Kinchil 
In Maya mythology, Ah Kinchil is the sun god. 
 
Ah Puch 
In Maya mythology, Ah Puch is the god of death. 
 
Ahau Chamahez 
In Maya mythology, Ahau Chamahez was one of two gods of medicine. 
 
Ahmakiq 
In Maya mythology, Ahmakiq is a god of agriculture. He locks up the wind 
when it threatens to destroy the crops.  
 
Ahriman 
In Zoroastrianism the Ahriman is the supreme evil spirit, lord of the 
darkness and death. 
 
Ahura Mazda 
In Zoroastrianism Ahura Mazda is the spirit of supreme good, god of light 
and life. 
 
Aida-Wedo 
Aida-Wedo is the voodoo rainbow snake loa.  
 
Airsekui 
In Huron mythology, Airsekui is the great spirit. He is invoked at times 
of great danger. 
 
Ajax 
In Greek mythology, Ajax was son of Telamon, king of Salamis, he was 
second only to Achilles among the Greek heroes in the Trojan War. 
According to subsequent Greek legends, Ajax went mad with jealousy when 
Agamemnon awarded the armor of the dead Achilles to Odysseus. He later 
committed suicide in shame. 
 
Akhushtal 
In Maya mythology, Akhushtal is the goddess of childbirth.  
 
Aktunowihio 
In Cheyenne mythology, Aktunowihio is the soul of the earth. A 
subterranean spirit. 
 
Akycha 
In Eskimo mythology, Akycha is the sun spirit.  
 
Alcaeus 
Alcaeus was a son of Perseus and Andromeda. 
 
Alcestis 
Alcestis was the wife of Admetus in Greek mythology. Her husband was ill, 
and according to an oracle would not recover unless someone vowed to die 
in his place. Alcestis made the vow and her husband recovered. After she 
died Hercules brought her back from the infernal regions. 
 
Alcides 
Alcides is an alternative name for Hercules.  
 
Amaethon 
Amaethon was the celtic god of husbandry. 
 
Amaterasu 
In Japanese mythology, Amaterasu is the sun goddess, grandmother of Jimmu 
Tenno, the first ruler of Japan.  
 
Amazon 
in Greek mythology, the Amazons were a group of female warriors living 
near the Black Sea, who cut off their right breasts to use the bow more 
easily. Their queen, Penthesilea, was killed by Achilles at the siege of 
Troy. The Amazons attacked Theseus and besieged him at Athens, but were 
defeated, and Theseus took the Amazon Hippolyta captive; she later gave 
birth to Hippolytus.  
 
Ambrosia 
In Greek mythology, ambrosia was the food of the gods which was supposed 
to confer eternal life upon all who ate it.  
 
Amen 
Amen is an alternative spelling of Ammon. 
 
Amitolane 
In Zuni mythology, Amitolane is the rainbow spirit. 
 
Ammon 
Ammon was an ancient Egyptian god. He was depicted as a human with a 
ram's head. He was one of the chief gods, and was adopted by the Greeks 
as Zeus and the Roman's as Jupiter.  
 
Amor 
Amor was the Roman god of love. 
 
Amphion 
In Greek mythology, Amphion was a son of Zeus and Antiope. He was the 
husband of Niobe. Amphion had great skill in music which he was taught by 
Hermes. He helped build the walls of Thebes, the stones moving themselves 
into position at the sound of his lyre. 
 
Amphitrite 
Amphitrite was the Greek goddess of the sea and wife of Poseidon. 
 
Amphitryon 
In Greek mythology, Amphitryon was King of Thebes, son of Alcaeus and 
husband of Alcmena. 
 
Amset 
In Egyptian mythology, amset was son of horus; guardian of the south. His 
canopic jar receives the stomach and large intestines of the dead.  
 
Amun 
Amun is an alternative spelling of Ammon. 
 
Amymone 
Amymone was a daughter of Danaus. She and her sisters were sent to search 
for water when Poseidon caused a drought in the district of Argos. Whilst 
searching she threw a spear at a dear, missed it and hit a satyr which 
pursued her. She called to Poseidon for help. He came, drove off the 
satyr and produced a perennial spring for her at Lerna, where he met her. 
 
An 
In Sumerian mythology, An was the personification of heaven.  
 
An tigh geatha 
In druidry an tigh geatha refers to the outer order.  
 
Anadyomene 
Anadyomene is a name of Aphrodite when she was represented as rising from 
the sea.  
 
Andraste 
In British mythology, Andraste is a warrior goddess. She was invoked by 
Queen Boudicca when she revolted against the Roman invaders.  
 
Androcles 
In Roman mythology, Androcles was a Roman slave who fled from a cruel 
master into the African desert, where he encountered a crippled lion and 
took a thorn from its paw. The lion later recognized the recaptured slave 
in the arena and spared his life. The emperor Tiberius was said to have 
freed them both. 
 
Andromache 
In Greek mythology, Andromache was the wife of Hector.  
 
Andromeda 
Andromeda was a daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopea. Perseus found her 
bound to a rock as a sacrifice to a sea monster. Perseus rescued her 
after killing the sea monster so that she might become his wife.  
 
Angpetu Wi 
In Dakota mythology, Angpetu Wi is the sun spirit.  
 
Anguta 
In Eskimo mythology, Anguta is a god who lives under the sea and drags 
down the dead. 
 
Aningan 
In Eskimo mythology, Aningan is the moon spirit.  
 
Ankh 
The Ankh was the ancient Egyptian amulet of life. It was usually employed 
as a pendant for a necklace.  
 
Anniu 
Anniu was an ancient Egyptian god.  
 
Annwn 
In British mythology, annwn is the otherworld.  
 
Anpao 
In Dakota mythology, Anpao is the spirit of the dawn. 
 
Antaeus 
Antaeus was the giant son of Poseidon and Ge. He was invincible so long 
as he remained in contact with the earth. Hercules killed him by picking 
him up so that his feet were off the ground and then stifling him. 
 
Anteros 
In Greek mythology, Anteros was the god of mutual love. He was said to 
punish those who did not return the love of others.  
 
Anthesteria 
Anthesteria was a Greek festival held each year in honour of the gods, 
particularly Bacchus and to celebrate the beginning of spring. 
 
Antigone 
In Greek mythology Antigone was the daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta. She 
was celebrated for her devotion to her father and her brother Polynices. 
 
Antilochus 
In Greek mythology, Antilochus was a son of Nestor. He was a hero of the 
Trojan war and was renowned for his speed of foot. He was killed by 
Memnon.  
 
Antiope 
In Greek mythology, Antiope was a daughter of Nycteus, King of Thebes. 
Zeus was attracted by her beauty and came to her in the guise of a Satyr. 
Antiope conceived twins by Zeus, and scared of her father's wrath fled to 
Sicyon where she married King Epopeus. 
 
Anu 
In Babylonian mythology, Anu is the god of the sky. He is the son of 
Anshar and Kishar. 
 
Anubis 
Anubis (Anepo) was an ancient Egyptian god. He was the son of Osiris and 
Isis. He was depicted as having the head of a jackal. He guided the souls 
of the dead from this world into the next. He also weighed the actions of 
the deceased in the presence of Osiris.  
 
Anulap 
In Truk Island mythology, Anulap is the sky god and the husband of 
Ligougubfanu.  
 
Apep 
Apep is an evil serpant in ancient Egyptian mythology.  
 
Aphrodisia 
Aphrodisia was the festival in celebration of Aphrodite celebrated 
throughout Greece and Cyprus.  
 
Aphrodite 
Aphrodite was the Greek goddess of love. The Romans called her Venus. 
 
Apis 
Apis were bulls symbolic of Osiris in ancient Egyptian culture. When they 
reached 25 years of age they were secretly killed by the priests and 
thrown into a sacred well. 
 
Apollo 
Apollo was the Roman name of the Greek god Phoebus. 
 
Apsu 
In Babylonian mythology, Apsu is the sweet-water ocean. It is the union 
of Apsu with Tiamat which brings forth the first gods.  
 
Arachne 
In Greek mythology, Arachne was a Lydian woman who was so skillful a 
weaver that she challenged the goddess Athena to a contest. Athena tore 
Arachne's beautiful tapestries to pieces and Arachne hanged herself. She 
was transformed into a spider, and her weaving became a cobweb. 
 
Aratron 
In magic, Aratron is ruler of the affairs of Saturn. It is a spirit which 
can be invoked on the 1st hour of saturday. 
 
Arcadia 
Arcadia was a green mountainous isolated region in the centre of 
Peloponnese inhabited by shepherds and peasants. 
 
Ares 
Ares was the Greek god of storms and tempests. He was a son of Zeus and 
Hera. He became symbolic with storms and turmoil in human relationships 
and hence to being the god of war. The Romans called him Mars.  
 
Arethusa 
In Greek mythology, Arethusa was a daughter of Nereus and Doris. She was 
a nympth changed by Artemis into a fountain to enable her to escape the 
pursuit of Alpheus.  
 
Argonauts 
In Greek mythology the Argonauts were heroes who made a hazardous voyage 
to Colchis with Jason in the ship the Argo to get the golden fleece. 
 
Argus 
In Greek mythology the Argus was a beast with a hundred eyes placed by 
Juno to guard Io.  
 
Ariadne 
In Greek mythology Ariadne was the daughter of King Minos. She helped 
Theseus out of the labyrinth with a thread. She was abandoned by Theseus 
on the Isle of Naxos where she subsequently met and married Bacchus. 
 
Arimaspians 
In Greek mythology the Arimaspians were a one-eyed people who conducted a 
perpetual war against the griffins in an attempt to steal the griffin's 
gold. 
 
Aristaeus 
In Greek mythology Aristaeus was the son of Apollo and Cyrene. He 
introduced bee-keeping. 
 
Artemis 
Artemis was a Greek goddess of the moon.  
 
Aruspices 
The Aruspices (Haruspices) were a class of priests in ancient Rome. Their 
job was to foretell the future from the entrails of sacrificial victims.  
 
Ascanius 
Ascanius was a son of Aeneas and Creusa. He escaped from Troy with his 
father.  
 
Asclepius 
Asclepius was a Greek god of healing. He was the son of Apollo and 
Coronis. He was taught the art of healing by Cheiron. Zeus killed him 
with a thunderbolt as a punishment for bringing a dead man back to life. 
 
Asgard 
In Norse mythology Asgard was the home of the gods. 
 
Ashera 
Ashera was an ancient Semetic goddess symbolised by the phallus.  
 
Ashnan 
In Sumerian mythology, Ashnan was the goddess of grain. She was created 
by Enlil to provide food and clothes for the gods.  
 
Ashtaroth 
Ashtaroth was a goddess worshipped by the ancient Canaanites. She was 
regarded as symbolising the productive power of nature. 
 
Asmodai 
In ancient Egyptian mythology Asmodai (Asmodeus) was an evil spirit who 
killed seven husbands of Sara but was driven away into the uppermost part 
of Egypt by Tobias. Asmodai is also reprsented as the prince of demons 
who drove King Solomon from his kingdom. 
 
Asrael 
In Islam, Asrael is the angel of death who takes the soul from the body.  
 
Astarte 
Astarte is a Syrian goddess representing the productive power of nature. 
She was a moon goddess.  
 
Astraea 
In Greek mythology Astraea was the daughter of Zeus and Themis, the 
goddess of justice. 
 
Ataentsic 
In Iroquois mythology, Ataentsic is the goddess of the earth. 
 
Atalanta 
In Greek mythology Atalanta was a famous huntress of Arcadia. She was to 
be married only to someone who could outrun her in a race, the 
consequence of failure being death. 
 
Atanua 
In the mythology of The Marquesas Islands, Atanua is the dawn goddess. 
She was the wife of Atea, and it was her miscarriage that created the 
seas.  
 
Ate 
Ate was the goddess of infatuation, mischief and guilt. She would mislead 
men into actions which would be the ruin of them. 
 
Atea 
In the mythology of the Marquesas Islands, Atea is the god of light and 
husband of Atanua.  
 
Ateshga 
Ateshga was a sacred site for the Guebres. It was on the peninsular of 
Apsheron on the west coast of the Caspian sea. Pilgrims would bow before 
the sacred flames which issued forth from the bituminous soil.  
 
Athena 
Athena (Athene) was the Greek goddess of intellect. She was the daughter 
of Zeus and Metis. 
 
Athene 
see "Athena" 
 
Athor 
Athor (Hathor, Hat-Her) was an Egyptian goddess symbolised by a cow with 
a solar disk on its head and haw-feather plumes. 
 
Atlantiades 
Atlantiades was another name for Hermes.  
 
Atlantides 
Atlantides was name given to the Pleiades who were fabled to be the seven 
daughters of Atlas. 
 
Atlantis 
In Greek mythology, Atlantis was an island continent, said to have sunk 
following an earthquake. The Greek philosopher Plato created an imaginary 
early history for it and described it as a utopia.  
 
Atlas 
Atlas was a giant who had to support the heavens upon his shoulders.  
 
Atreus 
In Greek mythology Atreus was the son of Pelops and Hippodamia. He was 
King of Mycenae. To seek revenge on his brother Thyestes for seducing his 
wife, Atreus gave a banquet at which Thyestes dined on the flesh of his 
own sons.  
 
Attis 
In classical mythology, Attis was a Phrygian god whose death and 
resurrection symbolized the end of winter and the arrival of spring. He 
was loved by the goddess Cybele, who drove him mad as a punishment for 
his infidelity, he castrated himself and bled to death. 
 
Au 
In the mythology of the Gilbert Island, Au is the sun god and lord of the 
skies.  
 
Augean stables 
in Greek mythology, the Augean stables were the stables of Augeas, king 
of Elis in southern Greece. One of the labours of Hercules was to clean 
out the stables, which contained 3,000 cattle and had never been cleaned 
before. He was given only one day to do the task so he diverted the river 
Alpheus through their yard.  
 
Aum 
Aum is the sacred mystical syllable representing the Hindu trinity. 
 
Aurora 
Aurora was goddess of the dawn. She was the daughter of Hyperion and 
Theia, and sister of Helios and Selene.  
 
Autolycus 
In Greek mythology, Autolycus was an accomplished thief and trickster. He 
was a son of the god Hermes, who gave him the power of invisibility.  
 
Avali 
Avali is the plural of Omuli. 
 
Avalon 
Avalon is the place where King Arthur is said to have gone after 
disappearing. It is a sort of fairy land.  
 
Avatar 
Avatar (Avatara) in Hindu mythology is an incarnation of a deity. 
 
Ba-Maguje 
In Hausa mythology, Ba-Maguje is the spirit of drunkeness.  
 
Baal 
In Canaanite mythology, Baal was the god of fertility. He was the son of 
El.  
 
Babamik 
In Arapesh mythology, Babamik is a cannibal ogress who is eventually 
lured to her death and she then becomes a crocodile. 
 
Bacabs 
In Maya mythology, the bacabs are the canopic gods. They stand at the 
four corners of the world supporting the heavens. 
 
Bacchanalia 
Bacchanalia were feasts held in honour of Bacchus and characterized by 
licentiousness and revelry.  
 
Bacchus 
Bacchus was another name for Dionysus.  
 
Balder 
In Norse mythology, Balder was the son of Odin and Freya and husband of 
Nanna, and the best, wisest, and most loved of all the gods. He was 
killed, at Loki's instigation, by a twig of mistletoe shot by the blind 
god Hodur.  
 
Banshee 
In Gaelic folklore, a banshee is a female spirit whose wailing outside a 
house foretells the death of one of its inhabitants. 
 
Bard 
A bard was an order of druid. The bard's office was to supervise, 
regulate and to lead. His robe was sky blue, symolising justice and 
truth.  
 
Barong 
In Balinese mythology, Barong is a protective spirit portrayed as a lion 
or tiger.  
 
Basalas 
see "Achemon" 
 
Bast 
Bast was an ancient Egyptian goddess. The cat was sacred to her.  
 
Batara Guru 
In Indonesian mythology, Batara Guru is the great god who made the earth. 
 
Bateia 
In Greek mythology, Bateia was a daughter of Teucer. She was married to 
Dardanus by whom she had two sons, Ilus and Erichthonius. 
 
Begu 
In Batak mythology, begu are ghosts which wander the afterworld formless 
and starving. They approach humans by way of mediums demanding sacrifices 
to feed on. They may also steel the soul of a living person for a 
husband/wife.  
 
Bel 
Bel (Belenos) was the Celtic god of light.  
 
Belam 
In Melanau mythology, Belam are protective spirits who catch the souls of 
sick people and return them to their bodies thereby curing them.  
 
Bellerophon 
In Greek mythology, Bellerophon was a victim of slander who was sent 
against the monstrous chimera, which he killed with the help of his 
winged horse Pegasus. After further trials, he ended his life as a 
beggar. His story was dramatized by Euripides.  
 
Bellona 
Bellona was the Roman goddess of war. 
 
Beltaine 
Beltaine is the name of the feast of the spring equinox.  
 
Berserker 
In Norse mythology, a berserker was a warrior whose frenzy in battle 
transformed him into a wolf or bear howling and foaming at the mouth, and 
rendered him immune to sword and flame.  
 
Bertha 
In Norse mythology, Bertha is the goddess of spinning.  
 
Bes 
Bes was the Egyptian god of recreation, music and dancing. He was 
represented as a grotesque dwarf wearing a crown of feathers. 
 
Bia 
In Greek mythology, Bia was a son of Styx and the Titan Pallas. Bia was 
the personification of might and force. 
 
Biloko 
In Zaire mythology, Biloko are spirits which live in hollow trees in the 
forest. They dress only in leaves and are devoid of hair, instead grass 
grows on their body. They have piercing eyes and a snout with a mouth 
which can open wide enough to swallow a man dead or alive. They have long 
sharp claws and can put a spell on passers by except those protected by 
strong counter magic.  
 
Bladud 
In English mythology, Bladud was the father of King Lear, and was said to 
have founded Bath having been cured by its waters.  
 
Boan 
Boan was another name for Dana. In this version of events, Boan visited a 
sacred well which, to punish her for breaking the law, rose up and 
pursued her to the sea and thus became the river Boyne where lived the 
salmon of knowledge which fed on nuts dropped from the nine hazel trees 
at the water's edge.  
 
Boann 
In Irish mythology, Boann is the goddess of rivers. 
 
Bochica 
In Chibcha mythology, Bochica was the supreme being.  
 
Bodhisattva 
A Bodhisattva is someone who has transmuted his personal human nature and 
raised it into impersonality. 
 
Bokwus 
In Kwakiutl mythology, Bokwus is a wild spirit of the woods who draws the 
spirits of the drowned to his home. 
 
Bope 
In Bororo mythology, Bope are evil spirits who attack the souls of the 
dead.  
 
Boraspati ni Tano 
In Batak mythology, Boraspati ni Tano is an earth spirit. Sacrifices are 
made to him when a new house is built. 
 
Boreas 
Boreas was the north wind god. He was the son of Astraeus and Aurora. 
 
Bragi 
In Norse mythology, Bragi is the god of poetry and eloquence. He was 
married to the goddess Iduna who dwelt in the underworld.  
 
Brahma 
Brahma is the Hindu supreme god and creator of the cosmos.  
 
Brighid 
In Gaelic mythology, Brighid was the goddess of metalwork, poetic 
inspiration and therapy.  
 
Bromius 
Bromius was another name for Dionysus.  
 
Brono 
In Norse mythology, Brono was the son of Baldr. He was the god of 
daylight. 
 
Brownie 
The brownie is a spirit popular in Scottish folk-lore. Brownies haunt 
houses, and if treated well will help with the drudgery of the housework 
while the occupants sleep. 
 
Bubastis 
In Egyptian mythology, Bubastis was the daughter of Isis. She was 
represented as having the head of a cat, the animal sacred to her.  
 
Bucentaur 
The bucentaur was a mythical creature, half man and half ox 
 
Bylgja 
In Norse mythology, Bylgja is a daughter of Aegir and Ran.  
 
Cadmus 
Cadmus was the founder of the ancient city of Cadmeia and gave the Greeks 
an alphabet.  
 
Caduceus 
Caduceus is the winged and serpent twisted staff or wand of Hermes. 
 
Calliope 
Calliope was the muse of heroic poems. She was the chief of the muses.  
 
Callisto 
Callisto was a daughter of Lycaon. She was one of Artemis' huntresses. 
She bore arcas to Zeus. To conceal their affair, Zeus turned her into a 
bear.  
 
Calypso 
In Greek mythology, Calypso was a sea nymph who waylaid the homeward-
bound Odysseus for seven years.  
 
Cassandra 
In Greek mythology, Cassandra was the daughter of Priam, King of Troy. 
Her prophecies were never believed, because she had rejected the love of 
the god Apollo. She was murdered with Agamemnon by his wife Clytemnestra, 
having been awarded as a prize to the Greek hero on his sacking of Troy.  
 
Castor 
Castor was the twin brother of polydeuces. He was a son of Zeus and Leda. 
He, like his brother was born from an egg after Zeus visited Leda 
disguised as a swan.  
 
Cavillaca 
In Quecha mythology, Cavillaca was a goddess loved by Coniraya. 
 
Celaeno 
Celaeno was one of the harpies. 
 
Celeus 
In Greek mythology, Celeus was King of Eleusis and the husband of 
Metaneira.  
 
Centaur 
A centaur was a beast half horse, and with the head, torso and arms of a 
man. 
 
Centeotl 
In Aztec mythology, Centeotl was the corn god. He was a son of 
Tlazolteotl and the husband of Xochiquetzal. 
 
Cepheus 
Cepheus was the king of Aethiopia. He displeased Poseidon by having a 
beautiful daughter, Andromeda. Poseidon then sent floods and a sea 
monster to terrorise the area until cepheus gave his daughter as a 
sacrifice to the sea monster. 
 
Cerberus 
Cerberus was a huge and savage dog with 3 heads which guarded the 
entrance to Hades. He was the offspring of Echidne and Typhon.  
 
Cercyon 
Cercyon was a son of Hephaestus. He was king near Eleusis. He challenged 
all travellers and wrestled them to death untill he challenged and was 
killed by Theseus.  
 
Ceres 
Ceres was the Roman goddess of agriculture, equivalent to the Greek 
Demeter.  
 
Cernunnos 
In Celtic mythology, Cernunnos was the god of the underworld and of 
animals. He is depicted as a man with the antlers of a stag.  
 
Cerridwen 
In Welsh mythology, Cerridwen is the goddess of dark prophetic powers. 
She is the keeper of the cauldron of the underworld, in which inspiration 
and divine knowledge are brewed. 
 
Cestus 
In Greek mythology, the cestus was a girdle worn by Aphrodite and which 
was endowered with the power of exciting love towards the wearer. 
 
Chahuru 
In Pawnee mythology, Chahuru is the spirit of water.  
 
Chalchiuhtlicue 
In Aztec mythology, Chalchiuhtlicue was the goddess of running water. She 
was the sister of Tlaloc. 
 
Chalybes 
The Chalybes were mythical inhabitants of north Asia Minor who invented 
iron working. 
 
Chantico 
In Aztec mythology, Chantico was the goddess of hearth fires and 
volcanoes. 
 
Chaos 
In Greek mythology, Chaos was the infinite space before Ge (the earth) 
was created. 
 
Charites 
The Charites were the Greek goddesses of gracefulness and the charms of 
beauty. 
 
Charon 
Charon was the ferryman who transported the dead across the river Styx to 
Hades.  
 
Charybdis 
In Greek mythology, the charybdis was a whirlpool formed by a monster of 
the same name on one side of the narrow straits of Messina, Sicily, 
opposite the monster Scylla. 
 
Cheiron 
Cheiron was a centaur. He was a son of Cronus and Philyra. He learnt 
hunting and medicine from Apollo and Artemis.  
 
Chenoo 
In Abnaki mythology, the Chenoo were stone giants versed in hunting who 
were invoked to assist the hunters. 
 
Chia 
In Chibcha mythology, Chia is the moon-goddess. 
 
Chibchacum 
In Chibcha mythology, Chibchacum was the god of farmers and merchants.  
 
Chicomecoatl 
In Aztec mythology, Chicomecoatl was the goddess of corn and fertility. 
 
Chimaera 
The chimaera was a monster composed of the head of a lion, the body of a 
goat and a serpant for a tail. Bellerophon was sent to slay it.  
 
Chipiripa 
In Curra mythology, Chipiripa is the rain god.  
 
Chixu 
In Pawnee mythology, Chixu are the spirits of the dead. 
 
Cihuacoatl 
In Aztec mythology, Cihuacoatl was a goddess whose roaring signalled war. 
 
Circe 
In Greek mythology, Circe was an enchantress living on the island of 
Aeaea. In Homer's Odyssey, she turned the followers of Odysseus into 
pigs. Odysseus, bearing the herb moly provided by Hermes to protect him 
from the same fate, forced her to release his men.  
 
Cit Bolon Tum 
In Maya mythology, Cit Bolon Tum was a god of medicine. 
 
Clermeil 
In Voodoo, Clermeil is a loa in the form of a white-man. When angry he 
makes rivers overflow. 
 
Clio 
Clio was the muse of history. 
 
Clytemnestra 
In Greek mythology, Clytemnestra was the wife of Agamemnon. With the help 
of her lover Aegisthus, she murdered her husband and his paramour 
Cassandra on his return from the Trojan War, and was in turn killed by 
her son Orestes. 
 
Comus 
Comus was a Greek and Roman god of banquets.  
 
Conchobar 
In Celtic mythology, Conchobar was the King of Ulster whose intended 
bride, Deidre, eloped with Noisi. Conchobar killed Deidre's husband and 
his brothers and she died of sorrow. 
 
Congo 
In Voodoo, Congo is a handsome but lethargic and slow-witted loa. 
 
Coniraya 
In Quecha mythology, Coniraya is the creator of all things and the 
founder of agriculture. He came to earth as a beggar, fell in love with 
the goddess Cavillaca and secretly impregnated her by turning some of his 
sperm into fruit which she ate. Cavillaca later turned herself and her 
child into stone at the shame of mothering the child of a beggar. 
 
Corbenic 
Corbenic was the castle in the Arthurian legend in which the Holy Grail 
was kept. 
 
Cornucopia 
In Greek mythology, the cornucopia was one of the horns of the goat 
Amaltheia, which was caused by Zeus to refill itself indefinitely with 
food and drink.  
 
Cratos 
Cratos was a son of Uranus and Gaea. He was very strong.  
 
Creidhne 
In Celtic mythology, Creidhne was the god of metal working. 
 
Creusa 
In Greek mythology, Creusa was the daughter of Erechtheus and wife of 
Xuthus. She was also loved by Apollo. 
 
Cronus 
Cronus was the son of Uranus. He succeeded to the throne of the gods when 
Uranus was deposed. He married Rhea. He appears in Greek mythology. 
 
Cuchulain 
Cuchulain was a Celtic hero, the chief figure in a cycle of Irish 
legends. He is associated with his uncle Conchobar, King of Ulster; his 
most famous exploits are described in The Cattle Raid of Cuchulain. 
 
Cupid 
Cupid was another name for Amor.  
 
Cupido 
Cupido is an alternative spelling for Cupid.  
 
Curetes 
In Greek mythology the Curetes were attendants of Rhea. They were 
supposed to have saved the infant Zeus from his father Cronus and then to 
have become a sort of bodyguard of the god. 
 
Cybele 
Cybele was the Great Mother Goddess of the Phrygians and later the Greeks 
and Romans. 
 
Cyclops 
In Greek mythology, the Cyclops wereone of a race of Sicilian giants, who 
had one eye in the middle of the forehead and lived as shepherds. 
Odysseus blinded the Cyclops Polyphemus in Homer's Odyssey. 
 
Daedalus 
In Greek mythology, Daedalus was an Athenian artisan supposed to have 
constructed for King Minos of Crete the labyrinth in which the Minotaur 
was imprisoned. When Minos became displeased with him, Daedalus fled from 
Crete with his son Icarus using wings made by them from feathers fastened 
with wax. 
 
Daemons 
The daemons were an order of invisible beings. Zeus assigned one daemon 
to each man to attend, protect and guide him. 
 
Dagda 
Dagda was the Celtic equivalent of Cronus. Also called Cian.  
 
Daghdha 
In Irish mythology, Daghdha is the great god. He had a secret affair with 
Boann which resulted in the birth of Oenghus. 
 
Dagon 
Dagon was the god of the Philistines. He had the upper torso of a man and 
the tail of a fish. 
 
Dakaki 
In Hausa mythology, the Dakaki is a serpant spirit which causes the evil 
eye resulting in stomach ulcers. 
 
Dama 
In Huli mythology, dama are invisible deities which control the weather 
and attack people causing illness, sterility or death. Most of them can 
also bring good fortune, but a small minority are completely evil.  
 
Dama dagenda 
In Huli mythology, dama dagenda are evil forest-spirits that attack 
travellers making their noses bleed and giving them sores.  
 
Damballa 
In Voodoo, Damballa is a loa who governs snakes and floods and can cure 
all illness.  
 
Danaans 
The Danaans were one of the 3 Nemedian families who survived the Fomorian 
victory. The brought the stone of destiny from Falias.  
 
Danae 
In Greek mythology, Danae was daughter of Acrisius, king of Argos. He 
shut her up in a bronze tower because of a prophecy that her son would 
kill his grandfather. Zeus became enamored of her and descended in a 
shower of gold; she gave birth to Perseus.  
 
Danhyang Desa 
In Java mythology, each village has a Danhyang Desa which is a spirit who 
lives in a large tree near to or in the village. All blessings emanate 
from him. Any disasters occuring to the village are seen as a sign that 
he has been neglected. 
 
Daphne 
Daphne was a daughter of Peneus. She was pursued by Apollo and asked to 
be turned into a laurel tree to escape him, which she was.  
 
Daphnis 
Daphnis was a son of Hermes and a nymph. He was raised by Sicillian 
shepherds when his mother abandoned him.  
 
Dardanus 
In Greek mythology, Dardanus was a son of Zeus and Electra. He was 
originally a king in Arcadia, he migrated to Samothrace and from there to 
Asia where Teucer gave him the site of his town, Dardania. He married 
Bateia.  
 
Datagaliwabe 
In Huli mythology, Datagaliwabe is a giant who punishes offences against 
kinship laws with illness, fatal accidents or death in battle. 
 
Deianeira 
Deianeira was the daughter of Oeonus and the wife of Hercules.  
 
Deidamia 
Deidamia fell in love with Achilles and bore him Neoptolemus. 
 
Deirdre 
In Celtic mythology, Deidre was the beautiful intended bride of 
Conchobar. She eloped with Nosi, and died of sorrow when Conchobar 
killed him and his brothers.  
 
Demeter 
Demeter was a Greek goddess of the earth. She is also called Ceres. She 
was the nourishing mother, bringing forth fruits. She was a daughter of 
Cronus and Rhea.  
 
Demigod 
A demigod was a Greek hero. They were men who posessed god-like strength 
and courage and who had performed great tasks in the past. 
 
Deucalion 
In Greek mythology, Deucalion was the son of Prometheus. Warned by his 
father of a coming flood, Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha built an ark. 
After the waters had subsided, they were instructed by a god to throw 
stones over their shoulders which then became men and women. 
 
Dia 
Dia is an alternative name for Hebe.  
 
Diable Tonnere 
In Voodoo, Diable Tonnere is a powerful loa.  
 
Diablesse 
In Voodoo, Diablesses are the spirits of women who died as virgins. They 
are forced to purge the sin of dieing a virgin by living in the woods for 
many years before they will be allowed into heaven.  
 
Diana 
Diana was the Roman name for the Greek goddess Artemis. 
 
Diancecht 
In Irish mythology, Diancecht is the god of healing. He destroyed the 
giant serpent that threatened and destroyed cattle throughout the land. 
 
Dido 
Dido was a Phoenician princess. The legendary founder of Carthage, she 
committed suicide to avoid marrying a local prince.  
 
Diejuste 
In Voodoo, Diejuste is a benevolant loa.  
 
Dike 
Dike was the attendant of justice to Nemesis. 
 
Dinditane 
In Huli mythology, Dinditane is a fertility god of gardening. 
 
Dionysus 
Dionysus was a Greek god of happiness. He was also called Bacchus and 
Iacchus.  
 
Dis 
In Roman mythology, Dis was the god of the underworld, also known as 
Orcus. 
 
Discordia 
Discordia was the Roman goddess of strife.  
 
Druid 
The ancient druids were divided into 3 functional orders:primitive druid, 
bard and ovate. Druidism originated amongst the megalithic ancient 
British. They taught it to the immigrant celts, and later trained celts 
from the conntinent. 
 
Dryades 
The dryades were nymphs of the woods and trees. 
 
Duamutef 
In Egyptian mythology, Duamutef was son of Horus and guardian of the 
East. His canopic jar receives the lungs and heart of the dead.  
 
Dumuzi 
In Sumerian mythology, Dumuzi is the shepherd god.  
 
Dunawali 
In Huli mythology, Dunawali is an evil goddess who lodges herself in a 
woman's internal organs making the victim the innocent vehicle of the 
goddesses evil power.  
 
Duppies 
see "Duppy" 
 
Duppy 
In Jamaican folklore, Duppies are the ghosts of deceased people. An Obeah 
man will summon a Duppy and plant it in a home to curse the occupants. A 
sample of the victim's clothing, hair or especially menstrual fluid may 
be obtained so that a Duppy may rape a femal victim while she sleeps and 
make her ill. 
 
Durga 
Durga is a Hindu deity. She is depicted as having ten arms. Her most 
famous exploit was slaying Mahisha. The festival of Durga puja is 
celebrated annually in her honour. 
In Bali mythology, Durga is the goddess of death. 
 
Dyaus 
In Hindu mythology, Dyaus is the god of the sky.  
 
Dzivaguru 
In Korekore mythology, Dzivaguru was the great earth goddess. She lived 
in a valley near Dande, kept cattle and goats and dressed in goatskins. 
She posessed a long horn which gave he whatever she wished for. 
 
Ea 
In Babylonian mythology, Ea was the god of wisdom and magic.  
 
Eblis 
In Islamic mythology, Eblis is the chief of the evil spirits. 
 
Echo 
Echo was a mountain nymph and a servant of Hecate.  
 
Ehecatl 
In Aztec mythology, Ehecatl was the god of wind.  
 
Eirene 
Eirene was the goddess of peace.  
 
Ekahau 
In Maya mythology, Ekahau is the god of travellers and merchants. 
 
Ekkekko 
In Quecha mythology, Ekkekko is the god of good fortune.  
 
El 
In Canaanite mythology, El was the father of the gods.  
 
Electra 
In Greek mythology, Electra was daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, 
and sister of Orestes and Iphigenia. Her hatred of her mother for 
murdering her father and her desire for revenge, fulfilled by the return 
of her brother Orestes, made her the subject of tragedies by the Greek 
dramatists Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. 
 
Electryon 
Electryon was a son of Perseus and Andromeda. 
 
Elementals 
The Elementals are creatures or spirits of the elements. They are the 
forces of nature. 
 
Eloko 
In Zaire mythology, the Eloko are dwarves who live in the densest and 
darkest parts of the forest guarding their treasure, which is the fruits 
and animals of the forest. 
 
Elysium 
In Greek mythology, Elysium was originally another name for the Islands 
of the Blessed, to which favored heroes were sent by the gods to enjoy a 
life after death. It was later a region in Hades.  
 
Endymion 
In Greek mythology, Endymion was a beautiful young man loved by Selene, 
the Moon goddess. He was granted eternal sleep in order to remain forever 
young.  
 
Enki 
Enki was the Sumerian water god. Enki supplied clear drinking water to 
the town of Dilmun at the request of Ninhursag.  
 
Enkidu 
In the Epic of Gilgamesh, Enkidu is the wild man created by the goddess 
Aruru who becomes a companion to Gilgamesh. After Gilgamesh has provoked 
the anger of the goddess Ishtar, Enkidu sickens and dies.  
 
Enkimdu 
In Sumerian mythology, Enkimdu was the farmer god.  
 
Enlil 
In Sumerian mythology, Enlil was the son of Ki and An. He was the god of 
the sky and separated the earth from the heaven. 
 
Enyo 
Enyo was the Greek goddess of war.  
 
Eos 
Eos was the goddess of dawn. She was the daughter of Hyperion and Thia, 
and sister of Helios and Selene.  
 
Epaphus 
In Greek mythology, Epaphus was a son of zeus and Io who was born on the 
River Nile. He became King of Egypt and married Memphis, or by some 
accounts Cassiopeia. he had a daughter, Libya, who gave her name to the 
African country of Libya.  
 
Epigoni 
The Epigoni were the descendants of the seven against Thebes who attacked 
the city ten years after their fathers had done so. They were organised 
by Adrastus.  
 
Epimetheus 
Epimetheus was the brother of Prometheus. 
 
Epona 
In Celtic mythology, Epona was the goddess of horses. 
 
Erato 
Erato was the muse of love and marriage songs.  
 
Erebus 
Erebus was the Greek god of darkness. 
 
Erechtheus 
In Greek mythology, Erechtheus (Erichthonius) was an Attic hero, said to 
have been the son of Hephaestus and Atthis. He was brought up by Athena. 
 
Erichthonius 
see "Erechtheus" 
 
Eridanus 
Eridanus was a Greek river god known as the king of rivers. He was a son 
of Oceanus and Tethys. 
 
Erinys 
Erinys was the attendant of vengeance to Nemesis. 
 
Eris 
Eris was the Greek goddess of strife. 
 
Eros 
Eros was the Greek god of love. He was the son of Aphropdite. 
 
Erzilie 
In Voodoo, Erzilie is the goddess of sexual love. 
 
Eteocles 
In Greek mythology, Eteocles was a son of the incestuous union of Oedipus 
and Jocasta and brother of Polynices. He denied his brother a share in 
the kingship of Thebes, thus provoking the expedition of the Seven 
against Thebes, in which he and his brother died by each other's hands. 
 
Europa 
Europa was the daughter of Agenor. She was carried off by Zeus who had 
transformed himself into a great white bull. 
 
Eurus 
Eurus was the east wind god.  
 
Euryale 
Euryale was one of the gorgons. 
 
Eurydice 
In Greek mythology, Eurydice was the wife of Orpheus. She was a dryad, or 
forest nymph, and died from a snake bite. Orpheus attempted 
unsuccessfully to fetch her back from the realm of the dead.  
 
Euterpe 
Euterpe was the muse of music.  
 
Fama 
Fama was an alternative name for Pheme. 
 
Farbanti 
In Norse mythology Farbanti was a giant who ferried the dead over the 
waters to the underworld. He was the father of Loki.  
 
Fate 
In Greek and Roman mythology, the Fates was goddesses who decreed what 
would happen to both men and gods. 
 
Fauna 
Fauna was a Roman goddess.  
 
Faunus 
Faunus was a Roman god similar to Pan.  
 
Fenris 
In Norse mythology, Fenris was the monstrous wolf of the god Loki. Fenris 
swallowed the god Odin but was stabbed to death by Odin's son, Vidar. 
 
Finweigh 
In Bilan mythology, Finweigh was the god who with Melu made man.  
 
Flora 
Flora was the Roman goddess of flowers, youth, and spring.  
 
Forso 
In Gururumba mythology, the forso are ghosts of the dead. They are 
tiresome attracting attention and causing accidents and illness. 
 
Fortuna 
Fortuna was the Roman goddess of luck.  
 
Freyr 
In Norse mythology, Freyr was Odin in another form as the god of rain, 
sunshine and fruits. He married Gredr. 
 
Fulla 
In Norse mythology, Fulla was attendant to Frigg. 
 
Furiae 
The Furiae were attendants of Hades and Persephone. 
 
Ga-oh 
In Iroquois mythology, Ga-oh is the wind-giant. His house is guarded by a 
bear, whose prowling brings the north wind; a panther whose whining 
brings the westerly wind; a moose whose breathing brings the wet east 
wind and a fawn whose returning to its mother brings the gentle south 
wind. 
 
Gaea 
Gaea was a Greek goddess of the earth.  
 
Gahonga 
In Iroquois mythology, the Gahonga are the jogah of rocks and rivers. 
 
Galatea 
In Greek mythology, Galatea was the daughter of Nereus and Doris. She 
rejected the advances of the Cyclops Polyphemus and instead gave herself 
to the Sicilian shepherd Acis. Polyphemus crushed Acis beneath a rock. 
 
Gandayah 
In Iroquois mythology, the Gandayah are the jogah who tend the earth's 
fertility. 
 
Ganesa 
Ganesa is an elephant headed Hindu god. He is the son of Siva and 
Parvati.  
 
Gangan 
In Voodoo, a gangan is an inferior shaman unable to reach hougan. 
 
Gans 
In Apache mythology, the Gans were mountain spirits sent to teach the 
Apache the arts of civilisation. But they went away because they were 
distressed by the corruption of people. 
 
Ganymeda 
Ganymeda is an alternative name for Hebe. 
 
Ganymedes 
Ganymedes was a son of the Trojan king Tros. He was carried off by Zeus 
and became the cup-bearer of the gods.  
 
Garm 
In Norse mythology, Garm is a hound which stands in front of Hel's home 
and snarls with jaws dripping blood at the pilgrims from the upper world. 
 
Genii 
Genii is an alternative name for the daemons. 
 
Geofon 
In British mythology, Geofon was the ocean goddess. 
 
Geyaguga 
In Cherokee mythology, Geyaguga is the moon spirit. 
 
Gikuyu 
Gikuyu and Mumbi were the spiritual ancestors of all the Kikuyu people. 
They had 9 daughters. For the daughters, Gikuyu found 9 husbands beneath 
a large fig tree at Murang'a for the daughters. These husbands then 
became the ancestors of the 9 Kikuyu clans.  
 
Gilgamesh 
Gilgamesh was a hero of Sumerian, Hittite, Akkadian and Assyrian legend. 
He was one-third mortal and two-thirds divine. Gilgamesh was Lord of the 
Sumerian city of Uruk.  
 
Ginnunggap 
In Norse mythology, Ginnunggap was the Yawning Void.  
 
Gioll 
In Norse mythology, Gioll was a river which surrounded the underworld, 
Hel. 
 
Gladsheim 
In Norse mythology, Gladsheim was the mansion in Asgard where the gods 
lived. 
 
Gleipnir 
In Norse mythology, Gleipnir is the chain which bounds Fenris. It is made 
from the footfalls of cats, the beards of women, the roots of mountains 
and the breath of fish. 
 
Gnomes 
The Gnomes are elementals evolved in the realm of Earth.  
 
Gohone 
In Iroquois mythology, Gohone is the spirit of winter.  
 
Goibhniu 
In Celtic mythology, Goibhniu was the smith god.  
 
Gold-comb 
In Norse mythology, Gold-comb is the cock who shall crow when ragnarok 
comes. 
 
Golden fleece 
The golden fleece was the fleece of the ram on which Phrixus had escaped 
and was given to aetes the king of colchis. It hung from an oak tree in 
the grove of Ares where a dragon guarded it. 
 
Gordian Knot 
In Greek mythology, the Gordian Knot was tied by King Gordius, and could 
only br unravelled by a future conquerer of Asia. Alexander cut it with 
his sword in 334BC.  
 
Gorgons 
The gorgons were three daughters of Phorcys and Ceto. 
 
Gotterdammerung 
In Norse mythology, Gotterdammerung is the end of the world.  
 
Graces 
Graces is an alternative name for the Charites. 
 
Graeae 
The Graeae were three daughters of Phorcys and Ceto. They had only one 
eye and one tooth between them which they shared. Perseus forced them to 
tell him where he could find Medusa by stealing their solitary eye and 
tooth. 
 
Grand Bois 
In Voodoo, Grand Bois is the loa of the forces of nature. 
 
Griffin 
The griffin was a mythical monster, the supposed guardian of hidden 
treasure, with the body, tail, and hind legs of a lion, and the head, 
forelegs, and wings of an eagle.  
 
Guanyin 
In Chinese mythology, Guanyin is the goddess of mercy.  
 
Guatrigakwitl 
In Wishok mythology, Guatrigakwitl is the creator who made all things.  
 
Guebres 
The Guebres were Persian fire worshippers.  
 
Guedes 
In Voodoo, guedes are the spirits of the dead.  
 
Gulltopr 
In Norse mythology, Gulltopr was the horse of Heimdall. 
 
Gullveig 
In Norse mythology, Gullveig was the thrice-born and thrice-burnt virgin. 
 
Gungnir 
In Norse mythology, Gungnir is Odin's spear, obtained from the Dwarves by 
Loki for Odin.  
 
Gwyn ap Nudd 
In Celtic mythology, Gwyn ap Nudd is the lord of the underworld and 
master of the wild hunt. He lives at Glastonbury Tor. 
 
Ha Wen Neyu 
In Iroquois mythology, Ha Wen Neyu is the great spirit. 
 
Hadad 
In Canaanite mythology, Hadad was the god of thunder and lightning. 
 
Hades 
Hades was the Greek god of the underworld. He was a son of Cronus.  
 
Haemus 
In Greek mythology, Haemus was a son of Boreas and Oreithyia. He married 
Rhodope and by her had a son, Hebrus. He and his wife presumed to assume 
the names of Zeus and Hera and were turned into mountains for their 
insolence.  
 
Hafoza 
In Jate mythology, Hafoza is the god of thunder and lightning.  
 
Hanghepi 
In Dakota mythology, Hanghepi is the spirit of the night moon.  
 
Hanuman 
In Hindu mythology, Hanuman is the monkey god and King of Hindustan. He 
assisted Rama in the recovery of his wife, Sita, from Ravana of Lanka.  
 
Hapi 
In Egyptian mythology, Hapi was the personification of the Nile. He was 
son of Horus and guardian of the North. His canopic jar receives the 
small intestines of the dead.  
 
Harmonia 
Harmonia was the daughter of Ares and Aphrodite. She married Cadmus. At 
the wedding she was given a necklace made by Hephaestus which confered 
irresistible beauty upon the wearer. 
 
Harpies 
The harpies were employed by the gods to carryout the punishment of 
crime.  
 
Harpocrates 
Harpocrates was the Egyptian god of silence.  
 
Hastsehogan 
In Navajo mythology, Hastsehogan is the god of houses.  
 
Hastseltsi 
In Navajo mythology, Hastseltsi is the god of racing. 
 
Hastsezini 
In Navajo mythology, Hastsezini is the fire-god.  
 
Hathor 
see "Hathor" 
 
Haumea 
In Hawaiin mythology, Haumea is the goddess of procreation and 
childbirth.  
 
Heammawihio 
In Cheyenne mythology, Heammawihio is the great spirit. 
 
Hebe 
Hebe was the goddess of youth. She was the daughter of Zeus and Hera. 
 
Hebrus 
In Greek mythology, Hebrus was a river god. He was the son of Haemus and 
Rhodope. 
 
Hecate 
Hecate was a Greek goddess of the moon and spirits. Dogs were sacred to 
her.  
 
Hector 
In Greek mythology, Hector was a Trojan prince, son of King Priam and 
husband of Andromache, who, in the siege of Troy, was the foremost 
warrior on the Trojan side until he was killed by Achilles.  
 
Heimdall 
In Norse mythology, Heimdall was the watchman of the bridge, Bifrost, 
which led to the underworld.  
 
Heise 
In Ju mythology, Heise was half man and half god. He created the forests 
from his own hair so that his own delicate son could have shelter from 
the searing sun.  
 
Hekau 
Hekau was a term for the magical formulae used on amulets in ancient 
Egypt. 
 
Hel 
Hel (Hela) was the Norse goddess of the underworld. 
 
Hela 
see "Hel" 
 
Helabe 
In Huli mythology, Helabe is a son of Honabe. 
 
Helahuli 
In Huli mythology, Helahuli is a son of Honabe. His four sons were the 
founders of mankind and the four tribes bear their names.  
 
Helen 
In Greek mythology, Helen was the daughter of Zeus and Leda, and the most 
beautiful of women. She married Menelaus, King of Sparta, but during his 
absence, was abducted by Paris, Prince of Troy. This precipitated the 
Trojan War. Afterwards she returned to Sparta with her husband.  
 
Helicon 
Helicon was a mountain in central Greece, on which was situated a spring 
and a sanctuary sacred to the Muses. 
 
Helios 
Helios was the Greek god of physical light. 
 
Hemera 
Hemera was the Greek goddess of day. She was born from Erebus and Nyx. 
She emerged from Tartarus as Nyx left it and returned to it as she was 
emerging from it. 
 
Heng 
In Huron mythology, Heng is the god of thunder. 
 
Hephaestus 
Hephaestus was the Greek god of volcanic fire. The Romans called him 
Vulcan. He was the son of Zeus and Hera. 
 
Heqt 
Heqt was the frog-headed goddess of ancient Egypt. She was wife of 
Khnemu. She represented resurrection and was symbolised by a frog. 
 
Hera 
Hera was a Greek goddess. She was mother to Hephaestus. 
 
Herabe 
In Huli mythology, Herabe is a god who causes insanity. 
 
Heracles 
see "Hercules" 
 
Hercules 
In Greek and Roman mythology, Hercules (Heracles) was considered as the 
perfect athlete. He was given twelve labours. 
1) Kill the Nemean lion. 
2) Destroy the Lernean hydra. 
3) Capture alive the Erymanthian boar. 
4) Capture alive the Ceryneian stag. 
5) Kill the Stymphalian birds. 
6) Clean the Augean stables. 
7) Bring alive into Peloponnesus the Cretan bull. 
8) Obtain the horses of Diomedes. 
9) Obtain the girdle of Hippolyte. 
10) Kill the monster and cattle of Geryon. 
11) Obtain the apples of Hesperides. 
12) Bring from the infernal regions Cerbeus the three headed dog of 
Hades.  
 
Hermaphroditus 
In Greek mythology, Hermaphroditus was the son of Hermes and Aphrodite. 
He was loved by a nymph who asked for eternal union with him. Her request 
was granted and they became one body with both male and female sex 
organs.  
 
Hermes 
Hermes was the Greek god of oratory. He was a son of Zeus and Maia. 
 
Herne The Hunter 
In English folklore, Herne The Hunter is the spirit of a hunter which 
guards travellers through Windsor Great Park. He wears the antlers of a 
stag upon his head. Herne was prominent in the tales of Robin Hood, 
although Windsor Great Park is nowhere near Sherwood Forest.  
 
Hesperides 
The Hesperides were daughters of Atlas and Hesperis.  
 
Hestia 
Hestia was a Greek goddess. She was a daughter of Cronus and Rhea. She 
was goddess of the hearth. She was also called Vesta.  
 
Het-Her 
see "Athor" 
 
Hindu 
see "Hinduism" 
 
Hinduism 
Hinduism is a religion that originated in India.  
 
Hino 
In Iroquois mythology, Hino is the thunder god, guardian of the skies.  
 
Hippocoon 
In Greek mythology, Hippocoon was a King of Sparta. He was the son of 
Oebalus and Gorgophone. He refused to purify Hercules after he murdered 
Iphitus and further offended Hercules by killing Oeonus.  
 
Hippolytus 
In Greek mythology, Hippolytus was the son of Theseus. When he rejected 
the love of his stepmother, Phaedra, she falsely accused him of making 
advances to her and turned Theseus against him. Killed by Poseidon at 
Theseus' request, he was in some accounts of the legend restored to life 
when his innocence was proven.  
 
Hiribi 
In Canaanite mythology, Hiribi was the goddess of summer. 
 
Hiro 
In Easter Island mythology, Hiro is the god of rain and fertility.  
 
Hokewingla 
In Dakota mythology, Hokewingla is a turtle spirit who lives in the moon. 
 
Honabe 
In Huli mythology, Honabe is the primaeval goddess and the first 
inhabitant of the land. She was seduced by the god Timbu and bore five 
deities.  
 
Horae 
The horae were the Greek goddesses of the seasons. They were daughters of 
Zeus and Themis.  
 
Horus 
Horus was the Egyptian hawkheaded sun god, son of Isis and Osiris, of 
whom the pharaohs were declared to be the incarnation.  
 
Hoturu 
In Pawnee mythology, Hoturu is the wind spirit. 
 
Houmea 
In Maori mythology, Houmea was a cannibal who swallowed her own children, 
but was forced to disgorge them by her husband, Uta. She later persued 
him and the children in the form of a stag and he killed her by throwing 
hot stones down her mouth.  
 
Houngans 
In Voodoo, the houngans are the priests.  
 
Hresvelgr 
In Norse mythology, Hresvelgr is a giant who lives in the extreme north 
and the motion of whose wings causes wind and tempest.  
 
Hu 
Hu was the giver of mead and wine to man. He holds a plough to show men 
that the noblest of the arts is to control and to guide.  
 
Huitaca 
In Chibcha mythology, Huitaca is the beautiful goddess of drunkeness and 
licentiousness.  
 
Huitzilopochtli 
In Aztec mythology, Huitzilopochtli was the son of Coatlicue and a god of 
war and the sun.  
 
Huixtocihuatl 
In Aztec mythology, Huixtocihuatl is the goddess of salt. 
 
Hunin 
In Norse mythology, Hunin was a raven of thought which sat upon Odin's 
shoulder and brought him news everyday of what was occuring in the world.  
 
Hydra 
In Greek mythology, the Hydra was a huge monster with nine heads. If one 
were cut off, two would grow in its place. One of the 12 labours of 
Hercules was to kill it. 
 
Hygea 
Hygea was the daughter of Aesculapius. She was the goddess of health. 
 
Hymen 
Hymen was the Greek and Roman god of marriage.  
 
Hymenaeus 
Hymenaeus is an alternative name for Hymen. 
 
Hypnos 
Hypnos was a son of night, and twin brother of Thanatos. He provided rest 
and relieved pain.  
 
Iacchus 
Iacchus is an alternative name for Dionysus.  
 
Ibo 
In Voodoo, Ibo is a handsome, friendly loa. 
 
Ibo Loa 
In Voodoo, the Ibo Loa are gods and spirits.  
 
Icarus 
Icarus escaped from the Minos labyrinth by means of wings made by his 
father Daedalus. In escaping he flew too close to the sun, the wax 
holding the feathers to the wings melted and icarus fell into the sea and 
drowned. 
 
Idlirvirissong 
In Eskimo mythology, Idlirvirissong is an evil spirit.  
 
Iduna 
In Norse mythology, Iduna was the wife of Bragi. She kept golden apples 
in a box which the gods ate to keep themselves young. 
 
Ifa 
Ifa is the Yoruba god of wisdom, knowledge and divining.  
 
Igaluk 
In Eskimo mythology, Igaluk is the moon spirit. 
 
Ilara 
In Tiwi mythology, Ilara is the underworld. 
 
Inanna 
In Sumerian mythology, Inanna is the sister of Utu. She must choose as a 
husband between Enkimdu and Dumuzi. Both gods were keen to marry her, but 
she eventually married Dumuzi. 
  
 
Incubus 
In folk-lore, the Incubus were male spirits who raped women during their 
sleep, producing Witches and Demons as offspring.  
 
Indra 
Indra is the Hindu sky god. He is depicted as a four-armed man on a white 
elephant carrying a thunderbolt. It is he who slashes the clouds with his 
thunderbolt to release the rain.  
 
Inti 
In Inca mythology, Inti is the sun god. 
 
Io 
In Greek mythology, Io was the daughter of Inachus. She was beloved of 
Zeus. Zeus changed her into a white heifer to protect her from the 
jealousy of Hera. 
 
Iphigenia 
In Greek mythology, Iphigenia was a daughter of Agamemnon and 
Clytemnestra. She was sacrificed by her father at Aulis to secure 
favorable winds for the Greek fleet in the expedition against Troy, on 
instructions from the prophet Calchas. According to some accounts, she 
was saved by the goddess Artemis, and made her priestess. 
 
Irene 
Irene was the Greek goddess of peace. She was sometimes regarded as one 
of the Horae, who presided over the seasons and the order of nature, and 
were the daughters of Zeus and Themis. 
 
Iris 
Iris was the goddess of the rainbow. She was the daughter of Thaumas and 
Electra. She was a sister of the harpies. She was a messenger who 
conveyed divine commands from Zeus and Hera to mankind.  
 
Ishtar 
Ishtar was the Mesopotamian goddess of love and war, worshiped by the 
Babylonians and Assyrians, and personified as the legendary queen 
Semiramis.  
 
Isis 
Isis was an ancient Egyptian goddess associated with serpants and the 
colour red. 
 
Isitoq 
In Eskimo mythology, Isitoq is a spirit who helps to find people who have 
broken taboos.  
 
Isolde 
In Celtic and medieval legend, Isolde was the wife of King Mark of 
Cornwall who was brought from Ireland by his nephew Tristan. She and 
Tristan accidentally drank the aphrodisiac given to her by her mother for 
her marriage, were separated as lovers, and finally died together.  
 
Itzpapalotl 
In Aztec mythology, Itzpapalotl is a goddess of agriculture.  
 
Ix Chel 
In Maya mythology, Ix Chel is the goddess of the moon.  
 
Ixion 
In Greek mythology, Ixion was King of the Lapithae in Thessaly who was 
punished for his wickedness by being tied to a perpetually revolving 
wheel of fire.  
 
Ixtab 
In Maya mythology, Ixtab is the goddess of the hanged. She receives their 
souls into paradise.  
 
Ixtlilton 
In Aztec mythology, Ixtlilton was the god of healing, feasting and games. 
 
Izdubar 
Izdubar was a hero of ancient Babylonia. He has feats similar to those of 
Hercules ascribed to him. 
 
Janus 
Janus was a two faced Roman god of beginnings and ends. 
 
Jason 
Jason was the rightful king of Iolcus. He was smuggled out of Iolcus by 
Cheiron. When Jason returned to claim his birthright, Pelias sent him to 
fetch the golden fleece from Colchis.  
 
Jean 
In Voodoo, Jean is a stern, but nervous loa who rules the thunder and 
earthquakes.  
 
Jinn 
In Muslim mythology, a jinn is a spirit which is able to assume human or 
animal shape.  
 
Jocasta 
Jocasta was the wife of Laius the king of Thebes. She unwittingly had 
incest with Oedipus, bringing a plague on Thebes. Her father sacrificed 
himself to rid Thebes of the plague. Jocasta hanged herself when she 
learnt the truth of her marriage to Oedipus. 
 
Jogah 
In Iroquois mythology, jogah are dwarf nature spirits.  
 
Jormungandr 
In Norse mythology, Jormungandr is the great dragon which lives in the 
Ocean-stream which runs around Midgard.  
 
Jotunheim 
In Norse mythology, Jotunheim is the abode of the giants. It is on the 
edge of the ocean far to the north east. 
 
Juno 
Juno was the Roman name for the Greek goddess Hera. 
 
Jupiter 
Jupiter was the Roman name for the Greek god Zeus.  
 
Kabta 
In Sumerian mythology, Kabta is the god of bricks, he is the god who lays 
foundations and builds houses.  
 
Kahit 
In Wintun mythology, Kahit is the wind god. 
 
Kali 
Kali is the Hindu goddess of destruction and death. She is the wife of 
Siva.  
 
Kalunga 
In Ndonga mythology, Kalunga is the creator of all things, the supreme 
god. 
 
Kan-u-Uayeyab 
In Maya mythology, Kan-u-Uayeyab was the god who guarded cities.  
 
Kanati 
In Cherokee mythology, Kanati was the first man and ancestor of the 
Cherokee. He was married to Selu. 
 
Kapo 
In Hawaiin mythology, Kapo is a fertility god.  
 
Kathirat 
In Canaanite mythology, the Kathirat were the wise goddesses. 
 
Keneun 
In Iroquois mythology, Keneun is chief of the Thunderbirds. He is an 
invisible spirit. Thunder is the sound of his beating wings and lightning 
his flashing eyes. 
 
Khem 
In Egyptian mythology, Khem was the god of reproduction and generation. 
He was identified as Pan by the Greeks. 
 
Khepera 
Khepera was the ancient Egyptian god of creation who propelled the sun 
across the sky.  
 
Khu 
Khu was the ancient Egyptian term for the soul. 
 
Khuno 
In Aymara mythology, Khuno is the god of snowstorms.  
 
Ki 
In Sumerian mythology, Ki was the personification of the earth. 
 
Kianda 
In Angolan mythology, Kianda is the god of the sea and the fish in it.  
 
Kinich Kakmo 
In Maya mythology, Kinich Kakmo is the sun god symbolised by the Macaw. 
 
Kishi 
In Angolan folklore, a Kishi is an evil spirit. It is a demon with two 
faces on its head. One face resembles that of a normal man, and the other 
is the face of a hyena with big strong teeth and powerful jaw muscles. 
 
Kisin 
In Maya mythology, Kisin is the evil earthquake spirit. He lives beneath 
the earth in a purgatory where all souls except those of soldiers killed 
in battle and women who died in childbirth spend some time. Suicides are 
doomed to his realm for eternity.  
 
Kolga 
In Norse mythology, Kolga is a daughter of Aegir and Ran. 
 
Kostrubonko 
In Russian mythology, Kostrubonko is god of the spring. 
 
Kothar-u-Khasis 
In Canaanite mythology, Kothar-u-Khasis was the god of craftsmanship. 
 
Kukucan 
In Maya mythology, Kukucan is the wind god. 
 
Kuri 
In Hausa mythology, Kuri is a black hyena spirit who causes paralysis.  
 
L'inglesou 
In Voodoo, L'inglesou is a fierec looking loa who lives among rocks and 
in ravines and kills those who offend him.  
 
Lacedaemon 
In Greek mythology, Lacedaemon was a son of Zeus and Taygete. He married 
Sparte. He was King of Lacedaemon and named the capital city Sparta after 
his wife.  
 
Laestrygones 
The Laestrygones were a race of giant cannibals. They were ruled by 
Lamus. At Telepylos Odysseus lost all but one of his ships to them. 
 
Lahar 
In Sumerian mythology, Lahar was the god of cattle. He was created by 
Enlil to provide cattle for the earth.  
 
Laius 
Laius was the king of Thebes and father of Oedipus. 
 
Lakshami 
Lakshami is the Hindu goddess of wealth and beauty. 
 
Lakshmi 
Lakshmi is the Hindu goddess of wealth and beauty. She is the consort of 
Vishnu and is celebrated during Diwali.  
 
Laocoon 
Laocoon was a Trojan prophet, son of Antenor and a priest of Apollo and 
Poseidon. He warned the Trojans against the Wooden Horse. 
 
Laodice 
Laodice was a daughter of Priam and the wife of Helicaon. When Troy fell 
she was swallowed by the earth.  
 
Lares 
The Lares were beings of the Roman religion protecting households and 
towns.  
 
Larissa 
Larissa was a city in Thessaly where Achilles was reportedly born.  
 
Leda 
Leda was a daughter of Thestius. She was the wife of Tyndareus. She was 
seduced by Zeus and gave birth to two eggs. From one hatched her daughter 
Helen and son Polydeuces, and from the other hatched Castor.  
 
Legba 
In Fon mythology, Legba is the youngest son of Lisa and Mawu. He is the 
god of fate. 
In Voodoo, Legba is one of the two gods who open the road to the spirit 
world. 
 
Lemnos 
Lemnos was a small island at the mouth of the Hellespont. Hephaestus 
landed on Lemnos when Zeus threw him out of heaven, and set up a forge on 
the island.  
 
Lethe 
In Greek mythology, Lethe was a river of the underworld whose waters, 
when drunk, brought forgetfulness of the past.  
 
Leto 
In Greek mythology Leto was the mother of Apollo. 
 
Leuce 
Leuce was a nymph loved by Hades. He turned her into a white poplar tree. 
 
Liber Pater 
Liber Pater was an ancient Italian god of the vine. 
 
Libera 
Libera was the Roman name for the Greek goddess Persephone. 
 
Limba 
In Voodoo, Limba is a rough male loa who lives among the rocks and 
persecutes people. He has an insatiable appetite and is said to kill and 
eat his devotees. 
 
Lisa 
In Fon mythology, Lisa is the sun god who causes the day and its heat. He 
is the god of strength and endurance. 
 
Litai 
Litai was the goddess of recompense.  
 
Loa 
In voodoo, the loa are spirits. They may be either male or female.  
 
Loki 
In Norse mythology, Loki was one of the Aesir (the principal gods), but 
the cause of dissension among the gods, and the slayer of Balder. His 
children are the Midgard serpent Jormungander, which girdles the Earth; 
the wolf Fenris; and Hela, goddess of death.  
 
Lubangala 
In Bakongo mythology, Lubangala is the protector of villages, men and the 
souls of the dead. He appears as a rainbow during and after storms. 
 
Luchtaine 
In Celtic mythology, Luchtaine was the god of wheel making. 
 
Lugh 
In Irish mythology, Lugh was the god of light. He killed his grandfather, 
Balor, during the great battle in which a new order of gods and goddesses 
took over from the primal beings of chaotic energy. He was the god of 
skill and ability.  
 
Luna 
Luna was the Roman name of the Greek goddess Selene.  
 
Lutin 
In Voodoo, a lutin is the ghost of an unbaptised child. 
 
Lutinus 
Lutinus was the Roman name for the Greek god Priapus. 
 
Mabon 
In Celtic mythology, Mabon was the Son of Light, equated with the Roman 
Apollo. He was the god of liberation, harmony, music and unity. 
 
Macha 
In Irish mythology, Macha is a goddess of athletic games, festivals and 
fertility.  
 
Macuilxochitl 
In Aztec mythology, Macuilxochitl was the god of music and dance. 
 
Mahisha 
Mahisha was chief of the demons in Hindu mythology. He was killed by 
Durga. 
 
Maia 
In Greek mythology, Maia was the daughter of Atlas and the mother of 
Hermes.  
 
Maman Brigitte 
In voodoo, Maman Brigitte is the loa of death and cemeteries. 
 
Mamlambo 
In Zulu mythology, Mamlambo is the godess of the rivers.  
 
Manannan mac Lir 
In Celtic mythology, Manannan mac Lir (Barinthus) was the god of the 
ocean. He ferried the wounded King Arthur to the otherworld so that he 
could be cured. 
 
Manes 
The manes were the souls of departed people in the Greek and Roman 
religions. 
 
Mangalubulan 
In Batak mythology, Mangalubulan is the god of thieves. 
 
Manu 
In Hindu mythology, Manu was the founder of the human race. He was saved 
by Brahma from a deluge. 
 
Mara 
In Buddhism, the Mara is a supernatural being who tried to distract 
Buddha from the meditations which led to his enlightenment. In Hindu 
mythology, Mara is a goddess of death. 
 
Marassa Jumeaux 
In Voodoo, Marassa Jumeaux are the ghosts of dead twins.  
 
Marduk 
Marduk was the Babylonian sun god, creator of Earth and humans. 
 
Mark 
In Celtic legend, Mark was king of Cornwall, uncle of Tristan, and suitor 
and husband of Isolde.  
 
Mars 
Mars was the Roman name for the Greek god Ares. 
 
Marsyas 
In Greek mythology, Marsyas was a satyr who took up the pipes thrown down 
by the goddess Athena and challenged the god Apollo to a musical contest. 
On losing, he was flayed alive. 
 
Maruts 
In Hindu mythology, the Maruts are the fierce storm-beings who toss the 
sea into foam.  
 
Mawu 
In Fon mythology, Mawu is the moon goddess. She is the sister of Lisa, 
and causes the night and its coolness. She is also the goddess of peace, 
joy, fertility, motherhood and rain.  
 
Mayahuel 
In Aztec mythology, Mayahuel was a goddess of maguey. 
 
Mbombo 
In Zaire mythology, Mbombo is the White Giant who rules over the chaos of 
the universe and one day from his stomach comes the sun, the moon and the 
stars, and soon after the trees, animals and people of the earth. 
 
Medea 
In Greek mythology, Medea was the sorceress daughter of the king of 
Colchis. When Jason reached Colchis, she fell in love with him, helped 
him acquire the Golden Fleece, and they fled together. When Jason later 
married Creusa, daughter of the king of Corinth, Medea killed his bride 
with the gift of a poisoned garment, and then killed her own two children 
by Jason.  
 
Meditrina 
Meditrina was a Roman goddess of health. She was a sister of Hygea. 
 
Medusa 
Medusa was the youngest and most beautiful of the gorgons. She loved 
Poseidon and desecrated the temple of Athene by meeting Poseidon there. 
For this she was punished by having her hair turned to snakes. The result 
was her appearance was so hideous to behold that it would turn the viewer 
to stone.  
 
Megapenthes 
In Greek mythology, Megapenthes was a son of Proetus and King of Argos. 
He exchanged his dominion with that of Perseus and afterwards killed 
Perseus. 
 
Melpomene 
Melpomene was the muse of tragedy.  
 
Memnon 
Memnon was the son of Eos and Tithonus. He was the king of Ethiopia who 
helped the Trojans and killed many Greeks. He was killed by Achilles in 
single combat whilst Zeus weighed their fates in the balance. 
 
Memphis 
In Egyptian mythology, Memphis was the daughter of Nile. She married 
Epaphus who founded the city of Memphis and named it after his wife. 
 
Menat 
The Menat was an ancient Egyptian amulet employed to bring joy and health 
to the bearer. It represented the power of reproduction.  
 
Menelaus 
Menelaus was the husband of Helen of Troy.  
 
Mercury 
Mercury was the Roman name for the Greek god Hermes.  
 
Metempsychosis 
Metempsychosis is the transmigration of the soul after death through the 
bodies of lower animals, plants or inanimate objects. Also called 
reincarnation. 
 
Metztli 
In Aztec mythology, Metztli was the moon god. 
 
Mictlan 
In Aztec mythology, Mictlan was the underworld. It was the home of all 
the dead except warriors and women who died in labour. 
 
Mictlantecuhtli 
In Aztec mythology, Mictlantecuhtli was the god of Mictlan and the dead.  
 
Midas 
In Greek mythology, Midas was a king of Phrygia who was granted the gift 
of converting all he touched to gold. He soon regretted his gift, as his 
food and drink were also turned to gold. For preferring the music of Pan 
to that of Apollo, he was given ass's ears by the latter.  
 
Mimir 
In Norse mythology, Mimir was a god of wisdom and knowledge. He dwelt by 
the ash-tree Yggdrasil.  
 
Minerva 
Minerva was the Roman name of the Greek goddess Athene. 
 
Minos 
In Greek mythology, Minos was a king of Crete (son of Zeus and Europa), 
who demanded a yearly tribute of young men and girls from Athens for the 
Minotaur. After his death, he became a judge in Hades. 
 
Minotaur 
In Greek mythology, the Minotaur was a monster, half man and half bull, 
offspring of Pasiphae, wife of King Minos of Crete, and a bull. It lived 
in the Labyrinth at Knossos, and its victims were seven girls and seven 
youths, sent in annual tribute by Athens, until Theseus killed it, with 
the aid of Ariadne, the daughter of Minos. 
 
Mithras 
Mithras was the Persian god of light. Mithras represented the power of 
goodness, and promised his followers compensation for present evil after 
death. He was said to have captured and killed the sacred bull, from 
whose blood all life sprang. Mithraism was introduced into the Roman 
Empire 68 BC. By about AD 250, it rivaled Christianity in strength. A 
bath in the blood of a sacrificed bull formed part of the initiation 
ceremony of the Mithraic cult, which spread rapidly, gaining converts 
especially among soldiers. 
 
Mitnal 
In Maya mythology, Mitnal was the underworld hell where the wicked were 
tortured. 
 
Mnemosyne 
Mnemosyne was the mother of the muses. She signified the memory of great 
events.  
 
Moerae 
Moerae was the Greek goddess of right and reason. 
 
Mombu 
In Voodoo, Mombu is a stammering loa who causes storms of torrential 
rain.  
 
Momus 
Momus was the ancient Greek god of jeering. 
 
Morpheus 
Morpheus was an ancient Greek god of dreams.  
 
Morrigan 
Morrigan was the Celtic goddess of war and death who could take the shape 
of a crow.  
 
Mot 
In Canaanite mythology, Mot was the god of sterility. 
 
Munin 
In Norse mythology, Munin was a raven of memory which sat on Odin's 
shoulder and along with Hunin brought Odin news each day of what was 
occuring in the world. 
 
Muse 
see "muses" 
 
Muses 
The muses were nympths of the springs.  
 
Myrtilus 
Myrtilus was the son of Hermes. 
 
Na'iads 
In Greek mythology, the Na'iads were nymphs of fountains and brooks.  
 
Nacon 
In Maya mythology, Nacon was the god of war.  
 
Nago Shango 
In Voodoo, Nago Shango is a powerful and lively loa.  
 
Nammu 
In Sumerian mythology, Nammu was the goddess who gave birth to the 
heavens and the earth. 
 
Nanna 
In Sumerian mythology, Nanna was the god of the Moon. 
 
Narcissus 
In Greek mythology, Narcissus was a beautiful youth who rejected the love 
of the nymph Echo and was condemned to fall in love with his own 
reflection in a pool. He pined away and in the place where he died a 
flower sprang up that was named after him.  
 
Nastrand 
In Norse mythology, Nastrand was the worst region of hell. It's roofs and 
doors were wattled with hissing snakes, ejecting poison and it was 
through this that murderers and perjurers were forced to wade as 
punishment. 
 
Nauplius 
Nauplius was the son of Amymone and Poseidon. He was the wrecker of 
Nauplia.  
 
Ndara 
In the mythology of Sulawesi Island, Ndara is the god of the underworld.  
 
Nefer 
The Nefer was an ancient Egyptian amulet signifying happiness and good 
luck. It was made of red stone or red porcelain and was worn from a 
necklace or a string of beads. 
 
Neith 
In Egyptian mythology, Neith was the goddess of the heavens.  
 
Nemesis 
Nemesis was the goddess of punishment.  
 
Nephthys 
Nephthys was an ancient Egyptian goddess. Daughter of Seb and Nut, she 
married Set. 
 
Neptune 
Neptune was the Roman name for the Greek god Poseidon.  
 
Nereid 
In Greek mythology, the Nereid were 50 sea goddesses, or nymphs, who 
sometimes mated with mortals. Their father was Nereus and their mother 
was Doris.  
 
Nereus 
Nereus was a sea god. He was a son of Pontys and Gaea.  
 
Nergal 
Nergal was the Babylonian god of the underworld.  
 
Ngendi 
In Fiji mythology, Ngendi is a fertility god who showed men the use of 
fire.  
 
Ni 
In Huli mythology, the god Ni is the sole cause of leprosy. 
 
Nidhogg 
In Norse mythology, Nidhogg is a dragon which devours the corpses of evil 
doers. He lives in Hwergelmir, in the realm of Hel. 
 
Nike 
Nike was the goddess of victory. She was the daughter of Pallas and Styx. 
 
Nikkal 
In Canaanite mythology, Nikkal was the goddess of the fruits of the 
earth. She was a daughter of Hiribi. She married Yarikh.  
 
Ningal 
In Sumerian mythology, Ningal was the wife of Nanna.  
 
Ninhursag 
In Sumerian mythology, Ninhursag was the earth mother. From her union 
with Enki came Ninsar, the goddess of plants. 
 
Ninkurra 
In Sumerian mythology, Ninkurra was a goddess. She was the daughter of 
Enki and his daughter Ninsar.  
 
Ninsar 
In Sumerian mythology, Ninsar was the goddess of plants. She was the 
daughter of Enki and Ninhursag.  
 
Niobe 
In Greek mythology, Niobe was the daughter of Tantalus and wife of 
Amphion, the king of Thebes. She was contemptuous of the goddess Leto for 
having produced only two children, Apollo and Artemis. She died of grief 
when her own 12 offspring were killed by them in revenge, and was changed 
to stone by Zeus. 
 
Njord 
In Norse mythology, Njord is a sea god of fruitfulness who lives in Noa-
tun.  
 
Norn 
In Norse mythology, the Norn were three goddesses of fate - the goddess 
of the past (Urd), the goddess of the present (Verdandi), and the goddess 
of the future (Skuld).  
 
Norns 
In Norse mythology, the Norns were three sisters responsible for the 
destiny of individuals and gods. 
 
Notus 
Notus was the south wind god. 
 
Nut 
In Egyptian mythology, Nut was the sky goddess and mother of Osiris by 
Seb. She was married to Ra, but also took Thoth for a lover. 
 
Nymph 
A nymph was a higher being than a human, but not immortal like a god. 
They were respected in mythology. 
 
Nymphs 
see "nymph" 
 
Nyx 
Nyx was a goddess of night. She was a daughter of Chaos. She married 
Erebus.  
 
Obatala 
In Yoruba mythology, Obatala was the son of Olodumare. He created makind 
from the earth.  
 
Oberon 
In English folklore, Oberon is the king of the elves. 
 
Oceanides 
The oceanides were 40 sea nymphs of the ocean. They were the daughters of 
Oceanus.  
 
Oceanus 
Oceanus was the son of Uranus and Gaea. He was the only Titan not to 
revolt against Uranus. 
 
Ocypete 
Ocypete was one of the harpies. 
 
Odin 
Odin was chief god of Norse mythology. A sky god, he lived in Asgard, at 
the top of the world-tree, and from the Valkyries receives the souls of 
half of the heroic slain warriors, feasting with them in his great hall, 
Valhalla; the rest are feasted by Freya his wife. 
 
Oduduwa 
In Yoruba mythology, Oduduwa is the wife of Obatala.  
 
Odysseus 
Odysseus was a Greek hero. He devised the strategy of the wooden horse 
used by the Greeks to conquer Troy.  
 
Oedipus 
Oedipus was the son of Laius. The Delphic oracle foretold that Laius 
would be killed by his son, so Oedipus was abandoned on mount Cithaeron 
with a nail through his feet. However, he was found by a shepherd and 
raised by Polybus. Hearing that he would kill his father, Oedipus left 
Corinth and met Laius on his travel. He killed him in an argument not 
knowing who he was. 
 
Oenghus 
In Irish mythology, Oenghus is the son of Daghdha and Boann. He is the 
god of fatal love. 
 
Oeonus 
In Greek mythology, Oeonus was a son of Licymnius. He was attacked by a 
dog belonging to the sons of Hippocoon, he threw a stone at the dog and 
in revenge the sons of Hippocoon killed him.  
 
Ogmios 
In Celtic mythology, Ogmios was the eloquent god of the strength of 
poetry, charm and incantation. He is depicted as an old man with 
wrinkles, but carrying a club and a bow. 
 
Ogoun 
In Voodoo, Ogoun is a warrior and blacksmith loa. He is especially fond 
of rum and tobacco. 
 
Ogres 
In Norse mythology, Ogres are creatures who make the storms and who with 
their iron clubs strike the earth and send it flying into the air. 
 
Ogun 
In Yoruba mythology, Ogun is a son of Obatala and Oduduwa. He was a 
warrior who won many battles and was rewarded with the kingdom of the 
town of Ire in the land of Ekiti given to him by Oduduwa. 
 
Ohdows 
In Iroquois mythology, the Ohdows are the jogah who control the 
underworld spirits and prevent them coming to the surface.  
 
Oileus 
Oileus was one of the Argonauts, he was the father of Ajax. 
 
Olokun 
In Nigerian mythology, Olokun is the god of sea and lagoons and brother 
of Olorun.  
 
Olorun 
In Nigerian mythology, Olorun is the god of the sky.  
 
Ometecuhtli 
In Aztec mythology, Ometecuhtli was the god of duality. 
 
Omphale 
Omphale was queen of Lydia. She bought Hercules as a slave who stayed 
with her for 3 years. 
 
Omuli 
In Nande folklore, an Omuli is a woman or girl who consumes the soul of a 
living person, and causes that person to die of consumption.  
 
Oneiros 
Oneiros was the ancient Greek god of dreams.  
 
Ops 
Ops was the Roman goddess of plenty and the personification of abundance. 
 
Oreades 
The oreades were mountain nymphs. 
 
Orestes 
Orestes was the son of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon. As a child he was 
smuggled out of Mycenae by his sister Electra when Clytemnestra and 
Aegisthus seized power. He later killed Clytemnestra with the help of 
Electra and Pylades and was punished by the Erinnyes.  
 
Orion 
Orion was a giant and son of Poseidon. He was a hunter and very handsome. 
He was promised the hand of Merope whom he loved if he could ride Chios. 
He did but was not given Merope so he seduced her. Apollo caused his 
death at the hands of Artemis who put his image in the stars. 
 
Orpheus 
Orpheus was a mythical Greek poet and musician. The son of Apollo and a 
muse, he married Eurydice, who died from the bite of a snake. Orpheus 
went down to Hades to bring her back and her return to life was granted 
on condition that he walk ahead of her without looking back. He did look 
back and Eurydice was irretrievably lost. In his grief, he offended the 
maenad women of Thrace, and was torn to pieces by them.  
 
Osiris 
Osiris was the Egyptian god of goodness. He ruled the underworld after 
being killed by Set. 
 
Outgard 
In Norse mythology, Outgard is the home of giants and monsters. 
 
Ovate 
An ovate was a type of druid. His purpose was to observe and invent. His 
robe was green symbolising budding life. 
 
Pales 
Pales was a Roman god of cattle-rearing.  
 
Pallas 
In Greek mythology Pallas was one of the Titans. He was a son of Crius 
and Eurybia and brother of Astraeus and Perses. He married Styx and 
fathered Zelus, Cratos, Bia and Nike.  
 
Pan 
Pan was the Greek god who looked after shepherds and their flocks. His 
parentage is unsure. In some accounts he is the son of Zeus, in others 
the son of Hermes. His mother was a nymph.  
 
Pandarus 
In Greek mythology, Pandarus was the leader of the forces of Zeleia in 
Lycia at the Trojan War. He was the second best Greek archer (next to 
Paris) and fought in the Trojan War as an archer.  
 
Pandion 
In Greek mythology, Pandion was a son of Erichthonius, the King of 
Athens.  
 
Pandora 
Pandora was a woman made by the gods. She was taken to Epimetheus by 
Hermes. He made her his wife, against his brother's advice. Pandora came 
with a sealed vase. Her husband was tempted and opened the vase from 
which came all the troubles, weariness and illnesses that mankind is now 
burderned with. 
 
Paris 
In Greek mythology, Paris was a prince of Troy whose abduction of Helen, 
wife of King Menelaus of Sparta, caused the Trojan War. Helen was 
promised to him by the goddess Aphrodite as a bribe, in his judgment 
between her beauty and that of two other goddesses, Hera and Athena. 
Paris killed the Greek hero Achilles by shooting an arrow into his heel, 
but was himself killed by Philoctetes before the capture of Troy. 
 
Pasiphae 
In Greek mythology, Pasiphae was the wife of King Minos of Crete and 
mother of Phaedra and of the Minotaur. 
 
Patecatl 
In Aztec mythology, Patecatl was the god of medicine. 
 
Patroclus 
Patroclus was a cousin and close friend of Achilles. He was killed by 
Hector in the Trojan wars.  
 
Pax 
Pax is an alternative name for Eirene.  
 
Paynal 
In Aztec mythology, Paynal was the messenger to Huitzilopochtli.  
 
Pegasus 
Pegasus was the winged horse offspring of Medusa and Poseidon.  
 
Pehrer 
Pehrer was an ancient Egyptian god. 
 
Peirithous 
In Greek mythology, Peirithous was a King of the Lapiths and a son of 
Ixion and Dia. He waged war against the Centaurs and helped Theseus carry 
off the Amazon Antiope and later Helen. He tried to abduct Persephone, 
but was bound to a stone seat by her husband Hades and remained a 
prisoner in the underworld.  
 
Pelias 
Pelias was king of Iolcus and half-brother of Jason.  
 
Penelope 
In Greek mythology, Penelope was the wife of Odysseus, the king of 
Ithaca; their son was Telemachus. While Odysseus was absent at the siege 
of Troy she kept her many suitors at bay by asking them to wait until she 
had woven a shroud for her father-in-law, but unraveled her work each 
night. When Odysseus returned, after 20 years, he and Telemachus killed 
her suitors.  
 
Peneus 
Peneus was a river god. He was a son of Oceanus and Tethys. 
 
Persephone 
Persephone was a Greek goddess. She was the daughter of Zeus and Demeter. 
Hades obtained sanction from Zeus to carry her off by force and marry 
her.  
 
Perseus 
Perseus found Medusa asleep and cut her head off which he presented to 
Athene. He married Andromeda.  
 
Petro loa 
In Voodoo, the Petro loa are a group of easily annoyed spirits symbolised 
by the whip.  
 
Phaea 
In Greek mythology, Phaea was the Crommyonium Sow a wild pig said to have 
been the offspring of Echidna and Typhon. It ravaged the town of Crommyon 
on the Isthmus of Corinth until it was destroyed by Theseus.  
 
Phaedra 
In Greek mythology, Phaedra was a daughter of Minos, King of Crete and 
Pasiphae. Her unrequited love for Hippolytus led to his death and her 
suicide. 
 
Pheme 
Pheme was the goddess of fame. She was a daughter of Gaea.  
 
Phoebus 
Phoebus was the Greek god of enlightenment. 
 
Picus 
Picus was a Roman god. He was the son of Saturnus and father of Faunus. 
His wife was Canens. He was a prophet and god of the forest.  
 
Pie 
In Voodoo, Pie is a grave soldier loa who lies at the bottom of ponds and 
rivers. He makes floods.  
 
Pinga 
In Eskimo mythology, Pinga is a female spirit who watches carefully over 
men's actions, especially their treatment of animals.  
 
Pitho 
Pitho was the daughter of Aphrodite. She was the goddess of persuasion. 
 
Pleiades 
The Pleiades were the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione. They were 
turned into doves by Zeus and and their image put into the stars to save 
them from the attentions of Orion. 
 
Pleuron 
In Greek mythology, Pleuron was a son of Aetolus and Pronoe and brother 
to Calydon. He married Xanthippe by whom he fathered Agenor, Sterope, 
Stratonice and Laophonte. He is said to have founded the town of Pleuron 
in Aetolia.  
 
Pluto 
Pluto was the Roman name for the Greek god Hades. 
 
Poena 
Poena was the attendant of punishment to Nemesis. 
 
Polites 
Polites was a son of Priam and Hecabe. He was killed before them by 
Neoptolemus.  
 
Pollux 
Pollux was the Roman name for Polydeuces. 
 
Polybus 
Polybus was king of Corinth. He raised Oedipus as his own son.  
 
Polydeuces 
Polydeuces was twin brother of Castor. He was a son of Zeus and Leda. He 
was born from an egg after Zeus visited Leda disguised as a swan.  
 
Polydorus 
In Greek mythology, Polydorus was a son of Cadmus and Harmonia. he was 
King of Thebes and husband of Nycteis by whom he fathered Labdacus.  
 
Polymnia 
Polymnia was the muse of song and oratory.  
 
Polynices 
In Greek mythology, Polynices was a son of Oedipus. He and his brother 
Eteocles were supposed to rule Thebes in alternate years, but Eteocles 
refused to relinquish the throne, and Polynices sought the help of 
Adrastus. Polynices and Eteocles killed each other in single combat. 
 
Polyphemus 
In Greek mythology Polyphemus was the most famous of the Cyclops. He is 
described as a giant cannibal living alone in a cave on Mount Etna. 
Odysseus and his companions unwarily sheltered in his cave, and 
Polyphemus killed and ate four of them before Odysseus intoxicated him 
with wine and when he fell asleep poked his eye out with a blazing stake. 
Polyphemus was also the despised lover of Galatea. 
 
Pomona 
Pomona was a Roman goddess of garden fruits.  
 
Poseidon 
Poseidon was the Greek god of the sea. He was a son of Cronus.  
 
Priapus 
Priapus was the Greek god of fertility in nature. He was a son of 
Dionysus and Aphrodite. 
 
Primitive druid 
The primitive druid was an order of druid involved with teaching science 
and religion. His robe was white symbolising light, purity and knowledge.  
 
Procne 
In Greek mythology, Procne was a daughter of King Pandion and Zeuxippe. 
She married Tereus. 
 
Procris 
In Greek mythology, Procris was a daughter of Erechtheus and wife of 
Cephalus. Artemis gave her the hound Laelaps which she gave to her 
husband.  
 
Procrustes 
In ancient Greek legends, Procrustes was a robber. He robbed people 
whilst they slept. If his victim was too short for his bed he was 
stretched to death. If the victim was too long for his bed, his feet or 
legs were cut off. Theseus treated Procrustes in the same way.  
 
Proetus 
In Greek mythology, Proetus was a son of Abas and the twin brother of 
Acrisius. In a dispute between the two brothers over the kingdom of 
Argos, Proetus was defeated and expelled. He fled to Iobates in Lycia and 
married his daughter Stheneboea. Iobates restored Proetus to his kingdom 
by force and Acrisius then agreed to share it, surrendering Tiryns to 
him. When Bellerophon came to Proetus to be purified for a murder, 
Sthenebeoa fell in love with him. Bellerophon refused her and she charged 
him with making improper proposals to her. Proetus then sent him to 
Iobates with a letter asking Iobates to murder Bellerophon. 
 
Prometheus 
Prometheus was a Greek hero. He was a son of the Titan Japetus. 
Prometheus obtained fire for mankind from Zeus. 
 
Psyche 
Psyche was the personification of the passion of love. She appears in 
Roman mythology.  
 
Pygmalion 
In Greek mythology, Pygmalion was a king of Cyprus who made an image in 
ivory of a maiden. He fell in love with the image and asked Venus to 
endow it with life. She did, and Pygmalion married the maiden. 
 
Pylades 
In Greek mythology, Pylades was son of Strophius and Anaxibia. He 
assisted Orestes in murdering Clytemnestra and eventually married his 
sister Electra. 
 
Qebhsennuf 
Qebhsennuf was the ancient Egyptian god of the West. His cannopic jar 
receives the liver and the gall-bladder.  
 
Quetzalcoati 
In Aztec and Toltec mythology, Quetzalcoati was the feathered serpant 
god.  
 
Quetzalcoatl 
In ancient Mexican mythology, Quetzalcoatl was the god of the air. He 
presided over commerce, and was said to have predicted the coming of the 
Spaniards. 
 
Rada loa 
In Voodoo, the Rada loa are the chief deities.  
 
Ragnarok 
In Norse mythology, ragnarok is the ultimate battle between good and evil 
from which a new order will come. 
 
Raja Guru 
In Batak mythology, Raja Guru is the gods' huntsman. He catches souls 
with his hounds Sordaudau and Auto Portburu. When he catches a soul that 
person dies suddenly.  
 
Raja Indainda 
In Batak mythology, Raja Indainda is the thunder god. He is the spy and 
messenger of the other gods.  
 
Rakshasa 
In Hindu mythology, the rakshasa are demons capabale of assuming the form 
of animals or humans they are completely evil, powerful creatures that 
delight in spreading fear, confusion, chaos, and destruction among human 
families and communities, finishing the trouble they cause in a 
murderous, ghoulish feast upon human flesh. They are among the most 
feared of all creatures, for they delight in mental torture of their 
victims .  
 
Ran 
In Norse mythology Ran is the wife of Aegir. It is she who uses a net to 
draw the sailors of sinking ships to their doom. 
 
Ranno 
Ranno was the ancient Egyptian god of gardens. he was represented as an 
asp.  
 
Rati-mbati-ndua 
In Fiji mythology, Rati-mbati-ndua is the god of the underworld who 
devours the dead. He lacks arms, but has great wings. 
 
Ravana 
In Hindu mythology, Ravana is the demon King of Lanka who abducted Sita, 
the wife of Rama.  
 
Revenant 
In Voodoo, a revenant is a spirit of the dead who feeling neglected 
returns to plague their living relatives. 
 
Rhadamanthus 
Rhadamanthus was a son of Zeus and Europa. He was famed for his wisdom 
and justice, and so after his death was made one of the judges of the 
underworld.  
 
Rhamnusia 
Rhamnusia was an alternative name for Nemesis.  
 
Rhea 
Rhea was the Greek goddess of the earth, mountains and forests. 
 
Runes 
The runes are the letters of the alphabet peculiar to the ancient 
Teutonic peoples of north west Europe. There are 3 runic alphabets; the 
Norse, with 16 characters, the Anglo-Saxon with 40 and the German. Saxon 
tradition ascribes the invention of the runes to Woden. Their use reduced 
under christianity because of their connection with magic. They were used 
for casting spells as well as divining the future. 
 
Runic wand 
A runic wand was a smooth willow wand inscribed with runic characters 
(runes).  
 
Sabians 
The Sabians were a sect which arose about 830 and who followed a religion 
of the ancient Syrians modified by Hellenic influences. 
 
Saga 
In Norse mythology, Saga was the daughter of Odin. She was the goddess of 
poetry. 
 
Sajara 
Sajara is the Rainbow-god of the Songhai people of eastern Mali. He is 
represented by a forked tree where a white ram is sacrificed to him. 
 
Salamanders 
The Salamanders are elementals evolved in the realm of Fire.  
 
Sam 
The Sam was an ancient Egyptian amulet for sexual pleasure. 
 
Samedi 
In Voodoo, Samedi is an important loa, god of the cemetery. 
 
Sarpedon 
Sarpedon was a son of Zeus and Europa. He went to Asia Minor and became 
the king of the Lycians after helping Cilix of Cilicia to defeat them. He 
helped Troy in the Trojan wars before being killed by Patroclus.  
 
Sati 
In Egyptian mythology, Sati was the goddess of the lower heavens (the 
air). 
 
Saturnus 
Saturnus was the Roman god of learning and agriculture. He appeared to 
king Janus and gave lessons on agriculture to his subjects.  
 
Satyr 
The satyrs were attendants to the god Dionysus. 
 
Savitar 
In Hindu mythology, Savitar is an all-powerful sun god. He cut off one 
hand at a sacrifice, and priests gave him a golden hand to replace it. 
 
Scarab 
The Scarab was an Egyptian amulet associated with Khepera.  
 
Sceiron 
In Greek mythology, Sceiron (Sciron) was a robber who haunted the 
frontier between Attica and Megaris. He robbed travellers and kicked them 
into the sea where they were eaten by a tortoise that lived there. He was 
killed by Theseus.  
 
Seb 
In Egyptian mythology, Seb was the earth god. He was the father of 
Osiris.  
 
Seidr 
Seidr was a form of Norse magic ascribed to Odin and Gullveig. It was 
mainly used for harmful purposes. 
 
Selene 
Selene was a Greek goddess of the moon. 
 
Semele 
In Greek mythology, Semele was a daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia. She was 
beloved by Zeus and bore him Dionysus.  
 
Serapis 
In Egyptian mythology, Serapis was another name for Osiris, and was known 
as the judge of the underworld. 
 
Serviteur 
In Voodoo, a serviteur is someone who becomes posessed by a loa during a 
ceremony.  
 
Set 
see "Seth" 
 
Seth 
In Egyptian mythology, Seth (Set) was the devil and enemy of Osiris.  
 
Shahar 
In Canaanite mythology, Shahar was the god of the dawn, and twin brother 
of Shalim. He was a son of El and Asherah. 
 
Shalim 
In Canaanite mythology, Shalim was the god of the dusk. He was the twin 
brother of Shahar and a son of El and Asherah.  
 
Shango 
In Yoruba mythology, Shango is an earth god. He was the King of Oyo, but 
because his citizens were dissatisfied with his tyranical rule he rode 
off into the forest and rose up into heaven where he became a god of 
thunder and lightning. He is the god of justice and fair play. 
 
Shapash 
In Caananite mythology, Shapash is the sun goddess. 
 
Shen 
The Shen was an ancient Egyptian amulet representing the sun's orbit and 
symbolising eternity.  
 
Silenius 
Silenius was the oldest satyr.  
 
Silvanus 
Silvanus was a Roman god of the forest. 
 
Sisyphus 
In Greek mythology, Sisyphus was an evil King of Corinth. After he died 
he was condemned in the underworld to roll a huge stone uphill, which 
always fell back before he could reach the top. 
 
Skuld 
In Norse mythology, Skuld was the Norn of the future. 
 
Sleipnir 
In Norse mythology, Sleipnir was the swift horse ridden by Odin.  
 
Sobo 
In Voodoo, Sobo is a loa who looks like a handsome soldier. 
 
Sodza 
In Hua mythology, Sodza is the great god who lives in heaven and to whom 
the priests pray for rain. 
 
Sogblen 
In Hua mythology, Sogblen is a god who mediates between priests and 
Sodza. He carries the priests prayers to Sodza and brings back promises 
of good crops.  
 
Sogbo 
In Fon mythology, Sogbo is the god of thunder, lightning and fire.  
 
Sol 
Sol was the Roman name for the Greek god Helios.  
 
Somnus 
Somnus was an alternative name for the Greek and Roman god Hypnos.  
 
Sousson-Pannan 
In Voodoo, Sousson-Pannan is an ugly loa covered in sores. He is totaly 
evil and drinks spirits and blood.  
 
Sphinx 
The Sphinx is a monster which appears in both Greek and Eyptian 
mythology. Both sphinx have the body of a lion and the head of a woman. 
The Greek sphinx has wings, the Egyptian does not. In Greek mythology, 
the Sphinx posed a riddle to all who seeked to pass. This riddle was at 
last explained by Edipus, where upon the Sphinx destroyed itself. The 
Egyptian Sphinx was a goddess of wisdom and knowledge. 
 
Stheino 
Stheino was one of the gorgons. 
 
Strophius 
In Greek mythology, Strophius was King of Phocis. 
 
Styx 
In Greek and Roman mythology, the Styx was the principal river in the 
underworld. Styx was the name of a nymph who was the daughter of Oceanus 
and Tethys. She dwelt at the entrance to Hades in a lofty grotto which 
was supported by silver columns. Styx took her children to help Zeus in 
the fight against the Titans. 
 
Suada 
Suada is an alternative name for Pitho. 
 
Succubus 
In folk-lore, Succubus were female spirits who seduced men and had 
intercourse with them whilst they slept. 
 
Surtr 
In Norse mythology, Surtr was a giant who lived in the extreme south, and 
whose flaming sword guarded the bounds of Muspelheim. 
 
Sutalidihi 
In Cherokee mythology, Sutalidihi is the sun-spirit.  
 
Sylphs 
The Sylphs are elementals evolved in the realm of Air.  
 
Tahit 
In Tlingit mythology, Tahit is the god of fate. 
 
Taio 
In Lakalai mythology, Taio is the moon goddess. 
 
Taisch 
Taisch was the Gaelic name given to "second sight", the involuntary 
ability of seeing the future or distant events. It originated in the 
Scottish highlands.  
 
Takuskanskan 
In Dakota mythology, Takuskanskan is the wind-spirit and trickster. 
 
Talaus 
In Greek mythology, Talaus was King of Argos. He was the son of Nias and 
Pero. Talaus sailed with the Argonauts.  
 
Talos 
In Greek mythology, Talos was a bronze man given to Europa by Zeus to 
guard Crete. He would clutch people to his breast and jump into a fire so 
that they were burnt alive. 
 
Tammuz 
In Sumerian mythology, Tammuz was a god of agriculture. He died in 
midsummer, and was brought back from the underworld by his lover Ishtar. 
 
Tantalus 
In Greek mythology, Tantalus was a son of Zeus. He was king of Phrygia, 
Lydia. He was admitted to the table of the gods, but displeased them and 
was punished by being put in a lake such that he just couldn't reach the 
water with his lips, and being tempted by fruit above him which again was 
just out of reach.  
 
Taranis 
In Druid mythology, Taranis is the god of the wheel, associated with 
forces of change.  
 
Tartarus 
In Greek mythology, Tartarus was the part of Hades where the wicked were 
punished.  
 
Taxet 
In Haida mythology, Taxet is a sky-god who receives the souls of those 
who die by violence. 
 
Tcolawitze 
In Hopi mythology, Tcolawitze is the fire-spirit. 
 
Telepylos 
Telepylos was the capital city of the Laestrygones. 
 
Telesphorus 
Telesphorus was the god of that which sustains the convalescent. He is 
depicted with Aesculapius and Hygea. 
 
Teoyaomqui 
In Aztec mythology, Teoyaomqui is the god of dead warriors. 
 
Terminus 
Terminus was the Greek and Roman god of boundaries. 
 
Terpsichore 
Terpsichore was the muse of dancing.  
 
Tet 
The Tet was an ancient Egyptian amulet representing the tree trunk in 
which the goddess Isis concealed the body of her dead husband.  
 
Tethys 
Tethys was a Titan woman. 
 
Teucer 
There are two descriptions for Teucer, both refer to Greek mythology. The 
first is that Teucer was the first King of Troy. He was a son of the 
river god Scamander and Idaea. The second that Teucer was son of Telamon 
and Hesione and the best archer in the Greek army in the Trojan War. He 
would have shot Hector if Zeus had not broken his sbowstring. 
 
Thalia 
Thalia was the muse of comedy and burlesque.  
 
Thanatos 
Thanatos was the ancient Greek god of death and of pain.  
 
Themis 
In Greek mythology, Themis was a daughter of Uranus and Gaea. She was the 
Greek goddess of human rights.  
 
Theseus 
In Greek mythology, Theseus was a son of Aegeus and Aethra. He was king 
of Athens. Stories about him include his slaying of the Minotaur. 
 
Thiassi 
In Norse mythology, Thiassi was a giant who slay Thor and cast his eyes 
up into heaven where they shone thereafter as stars.  
 
Thor 
Thor was the Norse god of thunder.  
 
Thoth 
Thoth was the ancient Egyptian god of wisdom. He was a lover of Nut, and 
playing draughts with the moon won from her a seventy second part of 
every day which he compounded into five days which he added to the 
original Egyptian calendar of 360 days.  
 
Thyrsus 
A thyrsus was a wand wreathed with ivy leaves, and topped with a pine-
cone carried by the Ancient Greeks as a symbol of Bacchus.  
 
Ti Jean Quinto 
In Voodoo, Ti Jean Quinto is an insolent loa in policeman form who lives 
under bridges. 
 
Tiamat 
In Babylonian mythology, Tiamat is the salt water Ocean. In the beginning 
there was only Apsu and Tiamat. 
 
Titan 
In Greek mythology, the Titans were the 12 sons of Ge and Uranus. 
 
Titanomachia 
Titanomachia was the 10 year war waged in Thessaly by Zeus and the 
Olympian gods against Cronos and the Titans led by Atlas. The war deposed 
the Titans.  
 
Titans 
see "Titan" 
 
Tithonus 
In Greek mythology, Tithonus was a son or brother of Laomedon the king of 
Troy. He was made immortal by by Zeus at the request of Eos who loved 
him.  
 
Tlaloc 
In Aztec mythology, Tlaloc is the great rain and fertility god. He lived 
at Tlalocan with the corn goddesses. 
 
Tlalocan 
In Aztec mythology, Tlalocan was the paradise of Tlaloc. It was where the 
souls of those killed by lightning, dropsy, skin diseases and those 
sacrificed to Tlaloc went.  
 
Tlazolteotl 
In Aztec mythology, Tlazolteotl was the goddess of licentiousness.  
 
Tonacatecuhtli 
In Aztec mythology, Tonacatecuhtli was the creator and provider of food.  
 
Tonatiuh 
In Aztec mythology, Tonatiuh was a sun-god, the eagle and heavenly 
warrior. 
 
Triton 
Triton was a Herald of Neptune. In Greek mythology the Tritons were sea-
gods with the upper half of a human and the lower part of the body that 
of a fish. They carried a trumpet which the blew to soothe the waves at 
the command of Poseidon.  
 
Troll 
In Icelandic mythology, Trolls were a race of giants. They appear in 
various Northern mythologies. In Norse mythology Trolls are represented 
as a type of goblin. 
 
Tros 
Tros was the grandson of Dardanus and the father of Ilus. He gave his 
name to the city of Troy. 
 
Tule 
In Zande mythology, Tule is the Spider god who brought from heaven the 
seeds of all the plants on earth which he scattered in all the countries.  
 
Tyche 
Tyche was the Greek goddess of luck.  
 
Tydeus 
Tydeus was the son of Oeonus and Calydon. After commiting a murder whilst 
a youth he fled to the court of Adrastus. 
 
Tyndareus 
Tyndareus was the king of Sparta. He was deposed by his brother 
Hippocoon, and reinstated by Hercules.  
 
Typhon 
In Greek mythology, Typhon was the father of destructive and fierce 
winds. He is dereived from the Egyptian Set or Seth.  
 
Tyr 
In Norse mythology, Tyr was the god of war and athletic sports. Tyr had 
one hand bitten off by the wolf Fenris, after he put it in the wolve's 
mouth as a pledge of security when the wolf allowed himself to be bound 
in a net until the judgement day.  
 
Ulala 
In Haida mythology, Ulala was a man-eating ogress.  
 
Ulle 
In Norse mythology, Ulle is the god of the chase. 
 
Ullr 
In Norse mythology, Ullr is the god of war and the chase. He dwells in 
the Dale of Bows.  
 
Ulysses 
Ulysses was the Roman name for Odysseus.  
 
Undines 
The Undines are elementals evolved in the realm of Water. 
 
Unicorn 
The unicorn is a mythical horse with a straight horn projecting from the 
forehead.  
 
Urania 
Urania was the muse of astronomy. 
 
Uranus 
In Greek mythology, Uranus was a son of Gaea. He later married Gaea.  
 
Urd 
In Norse mythology, Urd was the Norn of the past. 
 
Usukun 
In Lacandones mythology, Usukun is a troglodyte who rules earthquakes.  
 
Uta 
In Maori mythology, Uta is a hero and the husband of Houmea.  
 
Utchat 
The Utchat was an amulet representing the eye of Horus and used in 
ancient Egypt. According to the book of the dead, the amulet should be 
made of lapis-lazuli or mak stone. However, these amulets have been found 
made of almost every conceivable material.  
 
Uttu 
In Sumerian mythology, Uttu was the daughter of Enki and Ninkurra. Her 
mother warned her to avoid the advances of her father Enki. When Enki 
made advances on her she demanded cucumbers, apples and grapes as a gift. 
Enki supplied the fruits and as a result of their union eight plants 
spring forth. Enki ate the plants and was cursed by Uttu, subsequently 
becoming ill in eight different parts of his body. 
 
Utu 
In Sumerian mythology, Utu was the sun god. He was the son of Nanna and 
Ningal. 
 
Valhalla 
In Norse mythology valhalla is the paradise where the souls of dead 
warriors go to. 
 
Vampire 
In Slav mythology, a Vampire is an undead corpse which lives by drinking 
the blood of the living. 
 
Varuna 
In Hindu mythology, Varuna is a thousand-eyed god who sees all that 
happens in the world. 
 
Vayu 
In Hindu mythology, Vayu is the god of the winds. 
 
Venus 
Venus was the Roman name for the Greek goddess Aphrodite. 
 
Verdandi 
In Norse mythology, Verdandi was the Norn of the present. 
 
Vertumnus 
Vertumnus was a Roman god of garden fruits and seasons. He was the 
husband of Pomona. 
 
Vesta 
see "Hestia" 
 
Victoria 
Victoria is an alternative name for Nike. 
 
Ville au Camp 
In Voodoo, Ville au Camp is the underwater capital of the loas. 
 
Vingulf 
In Norse mythology, Vingulf was the mansion in Asgard where the godesses 
lived. 
 
Vithar 
In Norse mythology, Vithar was the god second in strength to Thor, and 
who would kill the wolf Fenris by wrentching the wolve's jaws asunder. 
 
Vritra 
In Hindu mythology, Vritra is the snake of darkness. Enemy of Indra.  
 
Vulcan 
Vulcan was the Roman name for the Greek god Hephaestus. 
 
Wakinyan 
In Dakota mythology, Wakinyan is the thunder-spirit.  
 
Wakonda 
In Sioux mythology, Wakonda is the Great Spirit.  
 
Woden 
Woden was the Anglo-Saxon form of the name of the god called Odin by the 
Norse. 
 
Xilonen 
In Aztec mythology, Xilonen was the goddess of young maize. She was a 
wife of Tezcatlipoca. 
 
Xipe Totec 
In Aztec mythology, Xipe Totec was the god of seedtime. 
 
Xochipilli 
In Aztec mythology, Xochipilli was the god of feasting and young maize. 
 
Xuthus 
In Greek mythology, Xuthus was a son of Helen by the nymph Orseis. He was 
King of Peloponnesus and the husband of Creusa. After the death of his 
father, Xuthus was expelled from Thessaly by his brothers and went to 
Athens, where he married the daughter of Erechtheus. 
 
Yacatecuhtli 
In Aztec mythology, Yacatecuhtli was the god of merchant adventurers. 
 
Yagis 
In Kwakiutl mythology, Yagis is a sea monster that overturns canoes and 
eats their crews. 
 
Yarikh 
In Canaanite mythology, Yarikh was the moon god.  
 
Yaxche 
In Maya mythology, Yaxche is the tree of heaven under which good souls 
rejoice. 
 
Ymir 
In Norse mythology Ymir is a giant. In the beginning there was just Ymir 
and Ginnunggap. Ymir was slain by Odin, Vili and Ve and out of his blood 
they made the sea, out of his flesh the earth and out of his bones the 
rocks and out of his skull the cavity of heaven. 
 
Yum Kaax 
In Maya mythology, Yum Kaax is the maize god. 
 
Zagreus 
Zagreus was a son of Zeus. He was torn apart and eaten by Titans apart 
from his heart which Athene saved. He is sometimes identified with 
Dionysus. 
 
Zelus 
In Greek mythology, Zelus was son of the Titan Pallas and Styx. He was a 
constant companion of Zeus and personified zeal. 
 
Zephyrus 
Zephyrus was the west wind god. 
 
Zethus 
In Greek mythology, Zethus was a son of Zeus and Antiope and twin brother 
of Amphion. 
 
Zeus 
Zeus was the third king of the Greek gods. He had his throne on mount 
Olympus. He was a son of Cronus.  
 
Zeuxippe 
In Greek mythology, Zeuxippe was the daughter of Eridanus and the wife of 
Pandion.  
 
Zobops 
In Voodoo, the zobops are an order of male sorcerers. 
 
Zombie 
In Voodoo, a zombie is the spirit of a person killed by a sorcerer and 
resurected by evil houngans. 
 
Zu 
In Babylonian mythology, Zu is an evil lesser-god who steals the tablets 
of destiny from Enlil while he was washing, and flies away to his 
mountain. He was killed by Lugalbanda who was sent by the gods to 
retrieve the tables of destiny.  
  
  
PLACES OF THE WORLD  
  
 
Aachen 
Aachen is an ancient German city near the Belgian and Dutch borders. It 
was the scene of coronations until the 16th century.  
 
Aare 
The Aare is a river in Switzerland. It flows 290 km through Brienz into 
the Rhine and is the longest river wholly in Switzerland. 
 
Aargau 
Aargau (Argovie) is a northern canton of Switzerland. 
 
Aarhuus 
Aarhuus is an ancient seaport in Denmark on the east coast of Jutland.  
 
Aasvar 
The Aasvar are a group of small islands off the Norwegian coast in the 
Arctic Circle. 
 
Abakan 
Abakan is a town in east Siberia. 
 
Abakansk 
Abakansk is a fortified place in Siberia near the Upper Yenisei. It was 
founded by Peter the Great in 1707. 
 
Abana 
The Abana is a river near Damascus. 
 
Abano 
Abano is a village in Northern Italy famous for its mud-baths and warm 
springs. 
 
Abarim 
The Abarim are a mountain range in East Palestine (Israel). 
 
Abbeville 
Abbeville is a town in France on the River Somme. 
 
Abbiategrasso 
Abbiategrasso is a town in north Italy. 
 
Abbotsbury 
Abbotsbury is a village in Dorset. It is noted for its swannery which was 
founded in the 14th century.  
 
Abdera 
Abdera was an ancient Greek city on the Thracian coast. Its inhabitants 
were reputedly stupid.  
 
Abensberg 
Abensberg is a village in Bavaria, in the Danube Valley where Napoleon 
defeated the Austrians in 1809.  
 
Aber 
Aber is a Celtic prefix given to place names signifying the mouth or 
entrance of a river into the sea or into another river.  
 
Aberbrothock 
Aberbrothock is the old name for Arbroath.  
 
Aberdare 
Aberdare is a town in South Wales at the junction of the Cynon and Dare.  
 
Aberdeen 
Aberdeen is a city on the east coast of Scotland in the region of 
Grampian. 
 
Aberfan 
Aberfan is a town in Wales. A slag-heap slid into a school playground 
here in 1966 killing 144 people, most of them children. 
 
Abergavenny 
Abergavenny is a town in England. It was a coal and iron mining centre 
around 1900. 
 
Aberystwith 
Aberystwith is a seaport in Wales on the Cardigan Bay.  
 
Abingdon 
Abingdon is a town in Berkshire 80 km north west of London. It was an 
important Saxon town where King Offa had a palace.  
 
Abinger Hammer 
Abinger Hammer is a village in Surrey noted for a remarkable clock which 
just out over the Dorking to Guildford road. There is a monument here 
marking the spot where Bishop Wilberforce was killed in a riding accident 
in 1873. 
 
Abo 
Abo is a one-time capital of Finland. It was capital until 1819 when it 
was supplanted by Helsinki. 
 
Abydos 
Abydos is an ancient city in north Egypt. 
 
Abyss 
An abyss is a very deep gorge.  
 
Acadia 
Acadia is the old name of Nova Scotia.  
 
Accra 
Accra is the capital of Ghana.  
 
Achaea 
Achaea was a district of ancient Greece on the south shore of the gulf of 
Corinth.  
 
Aconcagua 
Aconcagua is an extinct volcano and the highest peak of the Andes.  
 
Addis Ababa 
Addis Ababa is the capital of Ethiopia. 
 
Adelaide 
Adelaide is a seaport in Australia. Capital of south Australia. 
 
Adelie land 
Adelie land is a French owned part of Antarctica. 
 
Aden 
Aden is a country in south west Arabia. 
 
Adrianople 
Adrianople was the scene of the battle in 378 when the Romans were 
defeated by the Visigoths. 
 
Adriatic 
The adriatic sea is the mediterranean sea between Italy and the Balkans.  
 
Aegean 
The aegean sea is between Greece and Asia minor.  
 
Afghanistan 
Afghanistan is a country in Asia. It has a total area of 647,500 km2 and 
a land area of 647,500 km2 
The climate is arid to semiarid with cold winters and hot summers. 
The terrain is mostly rugged mountains with plains in north and 
southwest. 
Natural resources include natural gas, crude oil, coal, copper, talc, 
barites, 
sulphur, lead, zinc, iron ore, salt, precious and semi-precious stones. 
The religion is 74% Sunni Muslim, 15% Shia Muslim, 11% other. 
The language is 50% Pashtu, 35% Afghan Persian (Dari), 11% Turkic 
languages 
(primarily Uzbek and Turkmen), 4% thirty minor languages (primarily 
Balochi and Pashai) with much bilingualism.  
 
Africa 
Africa is a large continent. It straddles both the equator and zero 
degrees longitude.  
 
Agadir 
Agadir is a seaport in South Morocco. The original town was wrecked by an 
earthquake in 1960, and the new town built south of the old city in an 
area of greater geological stability.  
 
Agana 
Agana is the capital of Guam. 
 
Agen 
Agen is a market town in France. It is the site of a bridge over the 
Garonne River. 
 
Agincourt 
Agincourt is a village in north west France where Henry V defeated the 
French army in 1415. 
 
Agra 
Agra is a town in Uttar Pradesh on the Jumna River. It was the capital of 
the Mogul Empire. 
 
Agulhas 
Agulhas is a rocky projection 160 km east of the Cape of Good Hope. It is 
the most southerly part of Africa.  
 
Ahlen 
Ahlen is a town in Germany on the river Werse. It is a coal mining town 
with metal and engineering works. 
 
Ahvaz 
Ahvaz is the capital of Khuzestan province in Iran. It has an airport.  
 
Ajanta 
Ajanta is a village in south central India. 
 
Al-Uqsur 
Al-Uqsur is the Arab name for Luxor.  
 
Alabama 
Alabama is a state in south USA.  
 
Alamein 
Alamein is a place in north east Egypt where Axis forces were defeated in 
1942 by the Allies. 
 
Alaska 
Alaska is a state in the extreme north west of America. 
 
Alatau 
The Alatau are three mountain ranges in central Asia on the Russian and 
Chinese frontiers.  
 
Alba Longa 
Alba Longa was the chief city of the league of the Latins in ancient 
Latium. It was reportedly built by Ascanius some 300 years before the 
foundation of Rome.  
 
Albania 
Albania is a Balkan state between Greece and Yugolsavia.  
 
Alberta 
Alberta is the western prairie province of Canada.  
 
Alcaniz 
Alcaniz is a town in north east Spain.  
 
Alcira 
Alcira is a strongly fortified town in Valencia Province, Spain. It was 
founded by the Carthaginians. 
 
Aldbourne 
Aldbourne is a large village in Wiltshire.  
 
Aldeburgh 
Aldeburgh is a town in Suffolk. During the 16th century it was a seaport. 
 
Aldermaston 
Aldermaston is a village in Berkshire, England. It is home to Britain's 
atomic weapons research establishment.  
 
Alderney 
Alderney is one of the Channel Islands in the English Channel.  
 
Aldershot 
Aldershot is a town in Hampshire and home of the British army.  
 
Aldworth 
Aldworth is a village in Berkshire. 
 
Aleppo 
Aleppo is an important market city in north Syria.  
 
Aletsch 
The Aletsch is the most extensive glacier in Europe. It is 16 km long.  
 
Aleutian 
The aleutian islands progress south west from Alaska. 
 
Aleutians 
The Aleutians are a chain of islands in the north pacific ocean. They 
stretch west south west from Alaska.  
 
Alexandria 
Alexandria is a city and seaport of Egypt.  
 
Alfriston 
Alfriston is an ancient town in Sussex. The Star Inn at Alfriston is one 
of the oldest pubs in England, dating back to the 15th century.  
 
Algeria 
Algeria is a republic in north Africa. It has a total area of 2,381,740 
km2. 
The climate is arid to semiarid with mild, wet winters and hot, dry 
summers along the coast; drier with cold winters and hot summers on high 
plateau; sirocco is a hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in the 
summer. 
The terrain is mostly high plateau and desert; some mountains; narrow, 
discontinuous coastal plain. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, 
uranium, lead, zinc. 
The religion is 99% Sunni Muslim (state religion), 1% Christian and 
Jewish. 
The language is Arabic (official), French, and Berber dialects. 
 
Algiers 
Algiers is the capital of Algeria 
 
Alhama 
Alhama is a town in Southern Spain in Granada province on the Motril 40 
km south-west of Granada. It is renowned for its warm baths and drinking 
waters. It was ruined in 1884 by an earthquake.  
 
Alhaurin 
Alhaurin is a spa town in southern Spain. 
 
Alice Springs 
Alice Springs is a town in Australia. It was originally a telegraph 
station on the Todd river.  
 
Aliwal 
Aliwal is a village in Punjab on the left bank of the Sutley. A battle 
was fought here on January 28, 1846 between the Sikhs and the British 
army resulting in the total defeat of the Sikhs. 
 
Allhallows 
Allhallows is a small holiday resort on the Thames Estuary in Kent. It is 
the site of an Elizabthan iron beacon erected to warn of invasion.  
 
Almaden 
Almaden is a town in Ciudad Real province, Spain. It has large mercury 
deposits.  
 
Alphen 
Alphen is a market town in the Netherlands 16 km south east of Leiden.  
 
Alps 
The Alps are the highest mountain range in Europe. They are 960 km long 
and separate south and central Europe.  
 
Alresford 
Alresford is a market town in Hampshire.  
 
Alston 
Alston is a town in Cumbria, England. It is the site of limestone 
quarrying.  
 
Altai 
The Altai is a mountain range in west Siberia and Mongolia. 
 
Altamira 
Altamira is a cave near the village of Santillana del Mar. It contains 
remarkable paleolithic wall paintings. 
 
Altdorf 
Altdorf is the capital of Uri canton, Switzerland.  
 
Alton 
Alton is a town in Hampshire, England. It was the site of the Watney's 
Brewery. 
Alton is a town on the Mississippi in Illinios in the USA.  
 
Amasra 
Amasra is a sea port on the Black Sea in north Turkey.  
 
Amazon 
The Amazon is a major river in South America. 
 
Amba Alagi 
Amba Alagi is a mountain in Ethiopia 129 km north of Magdala. It is 
10000m high.  
 
Amberley 
Amberley is a village in Sussex. It was home to the Bishops of Chichester 
(in Amberley Castle). 
 
Ambleteuse 
Ambleteuse is a French seaport 10 km from Boulogne. James II landed here 
in 1688 in his flight from England. Ambleteuse was also the sight where 
Napoleon assembled his flotilla of barges to invade Britain. 
 
America 
America is a large continent in the western hemisphere. It comprises 
North America, Central America and South America.  
 
Amsterdam 
Amsterdam is the largest city in the Netherlands. It is the commercial 
and intellectual centre of the Netherlands. It stands on the river 
Amstel. 
 
Amu Darya 
The Amu Darya is a river in Asian Russia. It rises in the Pamirs and 
flows to the Aral Sea. It is 2398 km long. 
 
Anatolia 
Anatolia is a region of central Turkey. 
 
Ancona 
Ancona is the capital of Marche region in Italy.  
 
Andes 
The Andes are a mountain range running north south in South America.  
 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh is a state in east India.  
 
Andorra 
Andorra is an autonomous republic in the Pyrenees between France and 
Spain. Andorra has a total area of 450 km2. 
The climate is temperate; snowy, cold winters and cool, dry summers. 
The terrain is rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys. 
Natural resources are hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore and 
lead. 
The religion is virtually all Roman Catholic. 
The language is Catalan (official). Many people also speak some French 
and Castilian.  
 
Andover 
Andover is an old town in Hampshire. It was once an importan wool centre. 
 
Anglesey 
Anglesey is an island off the north west coast of Wales.  
 
Angola 
Angola is a country in west Africa. It has a Total area of 1,246,700 km2. 
The climate is semiarid in the south and along the coast to Luanda; north 
has cool, dry season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to 
April). 
The terrain is a narrow coastal plain which rises abruptly to a vast 
interior plateau. 
Natural resources are petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper, 
feldspar, gold, bauxite and uranium. 
The religion is 47% indigenous beliefs, 38% Roman Catholic, 15% 
Protestant. 
The language is Portuguese (official) and  various Bantu dialects.  
 
Anhui 
Anhui is a province in east China.  
 
Anhwei 
Anhwei is a province of China.  
 
Ankara 
Ankara is the capital of Turkey.  
 
Antarctica 
The antarctic is the south polar continent. It has a total area of about 
14,000,000 km2. 
The climate is severe low temperatures which vary with latitude, 
elevation, and distance from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than 
the Antarctic Peninsula in the west; warmest temperatures occur in 
January along the coast and average 
slightly below freezing. 
The terrain is about 98% thick continental ice sheet, with average 
elevations between 2,000 and 4,000 meters; mountain ranges up to 5,000 
meters high; ice-free coastal areas include parts of southern Victoria 
Land, Wilkes Land, 
and the scientific research areas of Graham Land and Ross Island on 
McMurdo Sound; glaciers form ice shelves along about half of coastline. 
Natural resources are coal and iron ore; chromium, copper, gold, nickel, 
platinum, and hydrocarbons have been found in small quantities along the 
coast; offshore deposits of oil and gas  
 
Antilles 
The Antilles are a group of islands in the caribbean. 
 
Antofag'asta 
Antofag'asta is a town in Chile on the Pacific coast. It has a port and 
smelting plant serving the local silver mines.  
 
Antwerp 
Antwerp is a seaport in Belgium on the river Scheldt. It is also an 
important diamond centre. 
 
Anzio 
Anzio was the scene of the Allied invasion of Italy during the Second 
World War in 1944.  
 
Aosta 
Aosta is the capital of Valle d'Aosta.  
 
Apapa 
Apapa is a seaport in Nigeria on the mainland opposite Lagos. 
 
Apennines 
The apennines are a chain of mountains stretching the length of the 
Italian peninsular. 
 
Apia 
Apia is the capital city of Western Samoa. It is a port on the north 
coast of Upolu island in the West Pacific. It was at one time home to 
Robert Louis Stevenson.  
 
Appalachians 
The Appalachians are a mountain system in eastern North America 
stretching 2400km from Alabama to Quebec. 
 
Apulia 
Apulia is a region of Italy comprising the south eastern heel.  
 
Aquila 
Aquila is the capital of Abruzzi province in Italy. 
 
Aquitaine 
Aquitaine is a region of south west France. It was an English possession 
from 1152 until 1452.  
 
Arabia 
Arabia is a country in south west Asia comprised of independent states. 
 
Arabistan 
Arabistan is a former name of the Iranian province of Khuzestan.  
 
Arad 
Arad is an industrial town in the Negev desert in Israel. 
 
Aral 
The Aral Sea is an inland sea in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. 
 
Ararat 
Ararat is a mountain in Turkey close to the border with Armenia. It is 
3932 metres tall.  
 
Archipelago 
An archipelago is a group of islands caused by the sea rising over a 
hilly landscape. Archipelagos are often volcanic in origin.  
 
Arctic 
The Arctic is the north polar region. 
The climate is persistent cold and relatively narrow annual temperature 
ranges; winters characterized by continuous darkness, cold and stable 
weather conditions, and clear skies; summers characterized by continuous 
daylight, 
damp and foggy weather, and weak cyclones with rain or snow. 
The terrain at the central surface is covered by a perennial drifting 
polar icepack which averages about 3 meters in thickness, although 
pressure ridges may be three times that size; there is a clockwise drift 
pattern in the Beaufort Gyral Stream, but nearly straight line movement 
from the New Siberian Islands (USSR) to Denmark Strait (between Greenland 
and Iceland); the ice pack is surrounded by open seas during the summer, 
but more than doubles in size during the winter and extends to the 
encircling land masses. 
Natural resources are sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, 
polymetallic nodules, oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals, 
whales).  
 
Arctic ocean 
The arctic ocean is the sea north of Europe, America and Asia.  
 
Ardeche 
The ardeche is a river in south east France.  
 
Ardennes 
The Ardennes is a wooded plateau in North-East France, South East Belgium 
and Northern Luxembourg, cut through by the river Meuse. There was heavy 
fighting here during the Great War and the Second World War. 
 
Arequipa 
Arequipa is a city in Peru at the base of the volcano El Misti. It was 
founded in 1540 by Pizarro. Today it is a busy commercial and cultural 
centre. 
 
Argentina 
Argentina is a republic in South America. It has a total area of 
2,766,890 km2. 
The climate is mostly temperate; arid in southeast; subantarctic in the 
southwest. 
The terrain is rich plains of the Pampas in northern half, flat to 
rolling plateau of Patagonia in south, rugged Andes along western border. 
Natural resources are fertile plains of the pampas, lead, zinc, tin, 
copper, iron ore, manganese, crude oil, uranium 
The religion is 90% nominally Roman Catholic (less than 20% practicing), 
2% Protestant, 2% Jewish, 6% other 
The language is Spanish (official), English, Italian, German, French.  
 
Argos 
Argos was a city in ancient Greece at the head of the Gulf of Nauplia. It 
was a cult centre of the goddess Hera.  
 
Arizona 
Arizona is a state in USA.  
 
Arkansas 
Arkansas is a state in central south USA. 
 
Arlberg 
Arlberg is an Alpine pass forming the main western entry to Austria.  
 
Armagh 
Armagh is a county in Northern Ireland. 
 
Armenia 
Armenia is a republic in east Europe. 
 
Arnold 
Arnold is an industrial town in Nottinghamshire, England.   
 
Arran 
Arran is an island in Scotland. 
 
Arras 
Arras is the capital of Pas-de-Calais department in France. It is a 
market town famous for its tapestry. It was alsmost destroyed during the 
Great War. 
 
Aruba 
Aruba is an island in the Caribbean. It was one of the Netherlands 
Antilles until 1986 when it achieved full autonomy.  
 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Arunachal Pradesh is a union territory in India. It is located in the 
Himalayas on the borders of Tibet and Burma.  
 
Arundel 
Arundel is a market town on the River Arun in West Sussex, England. It is 
the site of Arundel castle, the home of the Duke Of Norfolk.  
 
Ascension 
Ascension Island is a British island of volcanic origin in the south 
Atlantic. It is a breeding ground for sea turtles and sooty terns. 
 
Ascot 
Ascot is a town in Berkshire. The race course at Ascot was laid in 1711 
on the orders of queen Anne.  
 
Ashburnham 
Ashburnham is a town in Sussex. It was the last place where the Sussex 
iron industry survived, its iron foundery closing in the 19th century. 
 
Ashford 
Ashford was once a village in Kent, but became an important railway 
junction and so grew into a major commercial town. It has one of the 
oldest cattle markets in England.  
 
Ashkhabad 
Ashkhabad is the capital city of Turkmen. 
 
Ashmore 
Ashmore is the highest village in Dorset, 213 metres up in the chalk 
hills of Cranbourne Chase. 
 
Asia 
Asia is the largest continent. It is the landmass east of Europe. 
 
Asia Minor 
Asia Minor is an historical name for Anatolia, the Asian part of Turkey.  
 
Asmara 
Asmara is the capital city of Eritrea. It is situated on the Red Sea. 
 
Assam 
Assam is a state in India between east Pakistan and Burma. It is famed 
for its tea. 
 
Assisi 
Assisi is a town in Umbria, Italy. It was the birthplace of Saint 
Francis.  
 
Assyria 
Assyria was an empire in the Middle East from 2500BC until 612BC in what 
was then called Mesopotamia, now Iraq. 
 
Asturias 
Asturias is an autonomous region of northern Spain. It is a major coal 
producing area.  
 
Aswan 
Aswan is a winter resort town in Egypt. 
 
Atacama 
The Atacama is an extensive desert in South America covering a large area 
of northern Chile.  
 
Athens 
Athens is the capital city of Greece. 
 
Atlanta 
Atlanta is the capital and largest city in Georgia, USA.  
 
Atlantic 
see "atlantic_ocean" 
 
Atlantic ocean 
The atlantic ocean is the sea to the west of Europe and east of America.  
 
Atlas 
The Atlas are a mountain range in north west Africa. They extend from the 
Atlantic coast of Morocco to the Gulf of Gabes in Tunisia. They are 2414 
km long. 
 
Attica 
Attica is a region of Greece comprising Athens and the district around 
it.  
 
Auckland 
Auckland is a city and seaport of New Zealand.  
 
Auschwitz 
Auschwitz is a town near Krakow in Poland. It was the site of a camp used 
by Nazis to exterminate Jews during the Second World War. 
 
Austerlitz 
Austerlitz is a town in Czechoslovakia, formerly in Austria, where 
Napoleon defeated Alexander I of Russia and Francis II of Austria in 
1805. 
 
Austin 
Austin is the state capital of Texas. 
 
Australasia 
Australasia is the countries of Australia, New Zealand etc. 
 
Australia 
Australia is an island continent in the southern hemisphere.  
 
Austria 
Austria is a republic in central Europe. It has a total area of 83,850 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; continental, cloudy; cold winters with frequent 
rain in lowlands and snow in mountains; cool summers with occasional 
showers. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with Alps in west and south; mostly flat, 
with gentle slopes along eastern and northern margins. 
Natural resources are iron ore, crude oil, timber, magnesite, aluminum, 
lead, coal, lignite, copper, hydropower 
The religion is 85% Roman Catholic, 6% Protestant, 9% other 
The language is German.  
 
Auvergne 
Auvergne is an ancient province of central France.  
 
Auxerre 
Auxerre is the capital of Yonne department in France. It is a commercial 
and industrial centre. It is the site of a Gothic Cathedral. 
 
Avebury 
Avebury is a village in Wiltshire, England 10 km west of Marlborough. It 
is built on the world's largest stone circle.  
 
Avignon 
Avignon is the capital of Vaucluse department in France. It is an ancient 
Roman town at the crossing of the Rhone. Avignon is the Provencal tourist 
centre. 
 
Avila 
Avila is a town and capital of Avila province in Spain. It was the birth 
place of St. Teresa. 
 
Avington 
Avington is a village in Hampshire on the River Itchen. 
 
Avon 
Avon is a non-metropolitan county in southern England based upon the 
Lower Avon valley and Severnside. 
The River Avon flows 128 km from the Cotswolds to enter the Bristol 
Channel at Avonmouth.  
 
Awe 
Awe is a freshwater loch in Strathclyde, south east of Oban. It is 
drained by the River Awe into Loch Etive.  
 
Axbridge 
Axbridge is a town in Somerset. Anglo-Saxon and Norman Kings hunted stags 
on the Mendips from here. During the Middle Ages Axbridge became a wool 
centre producing knitted stockings. 
 
Axminster 
Axminster is an industrial town in Devon famous for its carpets.  
 
Aylesford 
Aylesford is an old village in Kent 5 km from Maidstone.  
 
Aylsham 
Aylsham is a market town in Norfolk on the River Bure.  
 
Ayrshire 
Ayrshire was once a county of south west Scotland.  
 
Azerbaijan 
Azerbaijan is a republic in Asia. The religion is traditionally Shi'ite 
Muslim. The language is Turkic. 
 
Azores 
The Azores are an island group in the atlantic ocean. 
 
Azov Sea 
see "Black_Sea" 
 
Babel 
Babel is the old Hebrew name for the city of Babylon. 
 
Babylon 
Babylon was the capital of the ancient Chaldean empire in Asia. Its 
hanging gardens were one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, until 
it was sacked by Cyrus of persia in 538 b.C.  
 
Bactria 
Bactria was a region of central Asia comprising modern Afghanistan, 
Pakistan and central Soviet Asia. 
 
Bacup 
Bacup is a market town in Lancashire, England 31 km north east of 
Manchester. 
 
Baden 
Baden was a state in south west Germany. In 1952 it was made part of 
Baden-Wurttemberg. 
 
Baden-Wurttenberg 
Baden-Wurttenberg is an administrative region of Germany. 
 
Baghdad 
Baghdad is the capital city of Iraq.  
 
Bahamas 
The Bahamas are a group of islands in the Caribbean. They have a total 
area of 13,940 km2. 
The climate is tropical marine; moderated by warm waters of Gulf Stream 
The terrain is long, flat coral formations with some low rounded hills. 
Natural resources are salt, aragonite, timber. 
The religion is Baptist 29%, Anglican 23%, Roman Catholic 22%, smaller 
groups of other Protestants, Greek Orthodox, and Jews 
The language is English; some Creole among Haitian immigrants. 
 
Bahrain 
Bahrain is a country composed of a group of islands in the Arabian gulf. 
It has a total area of 620 km2. 
The climate is arid; mild, pleasant winters; very hot, humid summers. 
The terrain is mostly low desert plain rising gently to low central 
escarpment. 
Natural resources are oil, associated and nonassociated natural gas, 
fish. 
The religion is Muslim (70% Shia, 30% Sunni) 
The language is  Arabic (official); English also widely spoken; Farsi, 
Urdu  
 
Baikal 
Lake Baikal is the largest freshwater lake in Asia, and the deepest 
freshwater lake in the world. 
 
Baku 
Baku is the capital of Azerbaydzhan. It is a port on the Caspian Sea. 
 
Bala 
Bala is a lake and town in Gwynedd, North Wales.  
 
Balaton 
Lake Balaton is the largest lake in Hungary. It is 596 km2. 
 
Baldwin 
Baldwin is a fishing town on Long Island, New York, USA.  
 
Balearic islands 
The Balearic islands are a group in the Mediterranean.  
 
Bali 
Bali is an island in Indonesia. 
 
Balkans 
The Balkan Peninsular (Balkans) are a mountain range between the Adriatic 
and Ionian seas in eastern Europe.  
 
Balkash 
Balkash is a lake in Kazakh. It covers an area of 6680 square meters. 
 
Balsas 
The River Balsas flows 800 km east to the Pacific through the valley of 
Morelos in Mexico.  
 
Baltic 
see "Baltic_Sea" 
 
Baltic Sea 
The Baltic Sea (The Baltic) is an arm of the Atlantic Ocean which opens 
into the North Sea by narrow channels between Denmark and Sweden. 
 
Baltimore 
Baltimore is an industrial city and seaport in Maryland, USA. It is the 
home of Johns Hopkins university. 
 
Baluchistan 
Baluchistan is a mountainous desert area comprising part of Iran, part of 
Pakistan and part of Afghanistan. 
 
Bamako 
Bamako is the capital city of Mali. It is on the River Niger. Bamako is 
the main industrial centre of Mali. 
 
Bamberg 
Bamberg is a city in Bavaria, Germany. It is an important river port on 
the Trans-European waterway.  
 
Bandung 
Bandung is a commercial city and capital of Jawa Barat province on the 
island of Java.  
 
Bangalore 
Bangalore is the capital city of Karnataka state in south India.  
 
Bangkok 
Bangkok is the capital city of Thailand.  
 
Bangladesh 
Bangladesh is a country in Asia. It has a total area of 144,000 km2. 
The climate is tropical; cool, dry winter (October to March); hot, humid 
summer (March to June); cool, rainy monsoon (June to October). 
The terrain is mostly flat alluvial plain; hilly in southeast. 
Natural resources are natural gas, uranium, arable land, timber. 
The religion is 83% Muslim, about 16% Hindu, less than 1% Buddhist, 
Christian, and other. 
The language is Bangla (official), English widely used.  
 
Bangui 
Bangui is the capital of the Central African Republic. It stands on the 
River Ubangi. 
 
Banjul 
Banjul is the capital city of Gambia. It is also the chief port of 
Gambia, and is situated on an island at the mouth of the River Gambia. 
 
Bantustan 
Bantustan (Bantu Homelands) was the name until 1978 of the Black National 
States in the Republic of South Africa. 
 
Barbados 
Barbados is an island in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 430 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (June to October). 
The terrain is relatively flat; rises gently to central highland region. 
Natural resources are crude oil, fishing, natural gas. 
The religion is 70% Anglican, 9% Methodist, 4% Roman Catholic, 17% other, 
including Moravian 
The language is  English. 
 
Barcelona 
Barcelona is a city and sea port in Spain. It is the capital city of 
Catalonia. 
 
Bari 
Bari is the capital of Apulia region in southern Italy. It is an 
industrial city and port on the Adriatic coast. Bari is renowned for its 
electronics industry and being the site of Italy's first nuclear power 
station. 
 
Barnstaple 
Barnstaple is a town in Devon. It was a major ship-building town in the 
Middle Ages.  
 
Barotseland 
Barotseland was a native kingdom in Africa. It is now part of Zambia. 
 
Barranquilla 
Barranquilla is a seaport in north Colombia on the River Magdalena. 
 
Basel 
Basel is the capital city of Basel canton in Switzerland. 
 
Bashkir 
Bashkir is an autonomous republic in eastern Europe. It was annexed by 
Russia in 1557, and was given autonomy in 1919.  
 
Basing 
Basing was once the site of a Norman castle which was replaced in the 
16th century by a Tudor mansion. It is a village just outside Basingstoke 
in Hampshire. 
 
Basingstoke 
Basingstoke is a town 80km south and west of London. It was once a small 
market town, it developed an industry of light engineering in the middle 
of the 20th century. During the 1960s and 1970s Basingstoke was expanded 
and finance industries moved in. 
 
Basque 
Basque is 3 provinces of Spain close to the border with France. Some of 
the residents wish to form a separate Basque state. 
 
Basra 
Basra is the only port in Iraq. It is located in the Shatt-al-Arab delta, 
97 km from the Persian Gulf.  
 
Bath 
Bath is a city in England. Bath is a faming community and mineral spa in 
east Jamaica. The spa was discovered by a runaway slave in the 1690s.  
 
Batley 
Batley is an old town in Yorkshire, 10 km south west of Leeds.  
 
Battle 
Battle is a town in East Sussex, England. It was the scene of the battle 
of Hastings in 1066. 
 
Bavaria 
Bavaria is an administrative region of Germany. 
 
Bay of Biscay 
The Bay Of Biscay is a stormy area of the Atlantic Ocean west of France 
and north of Spain. 
 
Bay of Pigs 
The Bay of Pigs is an inlet on the south coast of Cuba. It was the site 
of an unsuccessful invasion attempt by the USA in 1961. 
 
Bayern 
Bayern is the German name for Bavaria.  
 
Bayeux 
Bayeux is a town in Calvados department, France 29 km north west of Caen. 
 
Bayreuth 
Bayreuth is a town in Bavaria 68 km north east of Nuremberg.  
 
Beaminster 
Beaminster is a town in Dorset. 
 
Beaulieu 
Beaulieu is a village in southern Hampshire on the Beaulieu River.  
 
Beccles 
Beccles is a town in Suffolk on the River Waveney.  
 
Bedfordshire 
Bedfordshire is a county in central southern England. 
 
Beijing 
Beijing (formerly Peking) is the capital city of China. 
 
Beirut 
Beirut is the capital city of Lebanon. It is a sea port which was 
devastated by the civil war of the 1970s and 1980s. 
 
Belfast 
Belfast is the capital of northern Ireland. It is an industrial port and 
has suffered from guerrilla activity since 1968. 
 
Belfort 
Belfort is a town in France between the Vosges and the Jura mountains.  
 
Belgian Congo 
The Belgian Congo is a former name of Zaire. It was used from 1908 until 
1960.  
 
Belgium 
Belgium is a kingdom in west Europe. It has a total area of 30,510 km2. 
The climate is temperate; mild winters, cool summers; rainy, humid, 
cloudy. 
The terrain is flat coastal plains in northwest, central rolling hills, 
rugged mountains of Ardennes Forest in southeast .Natural resources are 
coal, natural gas. 
The religion is 75% Roman Catholic; remainder Protestant or other. 
The language is 56% Flemish (Dutch), 32% French, 1% German; 11% legally 
bilingual; divided along ethnic lines.  
 
Belgrade 
Belgrade is the capital of Yugolsavia and Serbia. It is a river port 
situated on the Danube and linked with the port of Bar on the Adriatic.  
 
Belize 
Belize (formerly British Honduras) is a country in Central America south 
of Mexico and east of Guatemala. 
The terrain is mainly forest. 
The religion is about 60% Roman Catholic and 35% Protestant. 
The language is English (official) Spanish is widely spoken, and native 
Indian dialects. 
 
Belize City 
Belize City was the capital city of Belize until following its 
destruction by a hurricane in 1961 it was decided to move the capital 
inland to Belmopan in 1970.  
 
Belorussia 
Belorussia is a republic in eastern Europe. 
 
Belsen 
Belsen was the site of a Nazi concentration camp in Lower Saxony during 
the second World War. 
 
Bembridge 
Bembridge is the most easterly village on the Isle Of Wight.  
 
Ben Lawers 
Ben Lawers is a mountain in Perth and Kincross, Scotland. It is 1215m 
high. 
 
Ben Nevis 
Ben Nevis is the highest mountain in the British Isles. It stands 1342 
meters high in the Grampians in Scotland.  
 
Benfleet 
Benfleet is a residential town in Essex, England. 
 
Bengal 
Bengal was a province of British India. It was divided in 1947 into West 
Bengal and East Bengal. East Bengal fought for independance from India 
and formed Bangladesh in 1972.  
 
Benghazi 
Benghazi is an historic city and industrial port in north Libya on the 
Gulf of the Sirte. 
 
Benin 
Benin is a province in west Africa. It has a total area of 112,620 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north. 
The terrain is mostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low 
mountains. 
Natural resources are small offshore oil deposits, limestone, marble, 
timber 
The religion is 70% indigenous beliefs, 15% Muslim, 15% Christian. 
The language is French (official); Fon and Yoruba most common vernaculars 
in south; at least six major tribal languages in north.  
 
Benin City 
Benin City is a former slave centre in Nigeria. 
 
Bere Regis 
Bere Regis is a water-cress growing village in Dorset. During the Middle 
Ages it was famed for its fairs, and was a resort of Kings.  
 
Bergen 
Bergen is a seaport and city in Norway. 
 
Bering Sea 
The bering sea is the northern part of the Pacific ocean. It separates 
America from Asia. 
 
Berkeley 
Berkeley is a village in Gloucestershire near to the River Seven, 24 km 
north of Bristol. It was the scene of the murder of Edward II.  
 
Berkshire 
Berkshire is a county of southern England.  
 
Berlin 
Berlin is a large industrial city in Germany. 
 
Bermuda 
Bermuda is an island in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 50 km2. 
The climate is subtropical; mild, humid; gales, strong winds common in 
winter. 
The terrain is low hills separated by fertile depressions. 
Natural resources are limestone, pleasant climate fostering tourism. 
The religion is 37% Anglican, 14% Roman Catholic, 10% African Methodist 
Episcopal (Zion), 6% Methodist, 5% Seventh-Day Adventist, 28% other. 
The language is English 
 
Bern 
Bern is the capital city of Bern canton and the federal capital of 
Switzerland. It stands on the Aare River.  
 
Bernese Alps 
The Bernese Alps (Bernese Oberland) are a mountain range in Berne Canton, 
Switzerland.  
 
Bexhill-On-Sea 
Bexhill-On-Sea is a popular seaside resort in Sussex. 
 
Bhopal 
Bhopal is an industrial city and capital of Madhya Pradesh in central 
India.  
 
Bhutan 
Bhutan was a state in India, it is now a country in south east Asia.  
 
Biafra 
The Republic of Biafra was an African state established in 1968 within 
Nigeria. Civil war led to its destruction in 1970. 
 
Bideford 
Bideford is a town in Devon. It was a major seaport from 1550 until 1750. 
 
Bihar 
Bihar is a state in north east India. 
 
Bikini Atoll 
Bikini Atoll is an atoll in the Marshall Islands, in the north Pacific, 
where the USA conducted atomic weapon tests between 1946 and 1963.  
 
Bilbao 
Bilbao is an industrial seaport in Spain. 
 
Binham 
Binham is a village in Norfolk. It was originally a Benedictine priory 
and centre founded around 1100.  
 
Bio-Bio 
The Bio-Bio is the longest river in Chile. It is about 370 km long. It 
flows from the Andes to the Pacific. 
 
Bioko 
Bioko is an island in the Bight of Bonny, West Africa. It is part of 
Equatorial Guinea. It was formerly a Spanish possession and known as 
Fernando Po.  
 
Birkenhead 
Birkenhead is a seaport on the River Mersey opposite Liverpool. 
 
Birmingham 
Birmingham is a city in the English midlands. Birmingham is an industrial 
city in Alabama, USA. 
 
Birnam 
Birnam is a village in Pert and Kinross, Scotland. It is mentioned in 
Macbeth.  
 
Bisceglie 
Bisceglie is a seaport town on the east coast of Italy. 
 
Bishop's Cannings 
Bishop's Cannings is a village in Wiltshire.  
 
Bishop's Waltham 
Bishop's Waltham is an old town in Hampshire. 
 
Biskra 
Biskra is a winter resort and market town in Algeria. 
 
Bisley 
Bisley is a village in Surrey and home to the National Rifle Association. 
Annual rifle shooting contests are held at Bisley.  
 
Bissau 
Bissau is the capital city and chief port of Guinea-Bissau. It stands on 
an island at the mouth of the Geba river. It was originally a fortified 
slave-trading centre, in 1869 it became a free port. 
 
Black Country 
The Black Country is the area of central England around and to the north 
of Birmingham. It is a heavily industrialized area which got its name in 
the 19th century from its belching chimneys.  
 
Black Forest 
The Black Forest is a mountainous coniferous forest region of Baden-
Wurttenberg in west Germany. It is bounded to the west and south by the 
Rhine which separates it from the Vosges. 
 
Black Prairie 
The Black Prairie is a region of Texas which extends 560 km south west 
from the Ouachita Mountains to Austin. It contains some very fertile 
areas which are primarily used for growing cotton.  
 
Black River 
Black River is a fishing town in south west Jamaica. Watchout for the 
crocodiles if you visit!  
 
Black Sea 
The Black Sea is an inland sea of Europe. 
 
Blackpool 
Blackpool is a seaside resort town in Lancashire, England.  
 
Blakeney 
Blakeney is a small town on the north coast of Norfolk at the estuary of 
the River Glaven.  
 
Blantyre-Limbe 
Blantyre-Limbe is the chief industrial and commercial centre for Malawi.  
 
Blarney 
Blarney is a small town in County Cork, Ireland.  
 
Blenheim 
Blenheim is a village in Bavaria. It was the scene of a battle in 1704 
when English troops under the Duke of Marlborough defeated the French and 
Bavarian armies. 
 
Bloemfontein 
Bloemfontein is the capital of the Orange Free State and the judicial 
capital of the Republic of South Africa.  
 
Blois 
Blois is a city in France on the right bank of the loire river. 
 
Blue mountains 
The blue mountains are a mountain range in east Jamaica famed for coffee. 
 
Blue Ridge Mountains 
The Blue Ridge Mountains are a mountain range extending from West Viginia 
to Georgia in the USA.  
 
Bocking 
Bocking is a town in Essex on the outskirts of Braintree. 
 
Bodmin Moor 
Bodmin Moor is a plateau in Cornwall comprised of rough grass.  
 
Boeotia 
Boeotia was a central district of ancient Greece. 
 
Bognor Regis 
Bognor Regis was one of the first English seaside resorts.  
 
Bogota 
Bogota is the capital of Columbia.  
 
Bohemia 
Bohemia is the western area of Czechoslovakia.  
 
Bolivia 
Bolivia is a republic in south America. It has a total area of 1,098,580 
km2. 
The climate is varies with altitude; humid and tropical to cold and 
semiarid. 
The terrain is high plateau, hills, lowland plains. 
Natural resources are tin, natural gas, crude oil, zinc, tungsten, 
antimony, silver, iron ore, lead, gold, timber 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic; active Protestant minority, 
especially Evangelical Methodist. 
The language is Spanish, Quechua, and Aymara (all official).  
 
Bologna 
Bologna is an industrial city and the capital of Emilia-Romagna in Italy. 
It is 80km north of Florence. 
 
Bombay 
Bombay is a city and seaport in India.  
 
Bonchurch 
Bonchurch is a village on the Isle of Wight.  
 
Bondu 
Bondu (Bondou) was once a sovereign country in West Africa inhabited by 
the Foulahs.  
 
Bonin 
Bonin is a group of islands in the north Pacific. 
 
Bonn 
Bonn is an industrial city and former capital of West Germany.  
 
Boothia 
Boothia is a peninsular on the Canadian Arctic coast. 
 
Bootle 
Bootle is a town in Merseyside, England. It shares a line of docks with 
Liverpool. It's industry includes tanning, ship-repairing and a tin 
plant.  
 
Bophuthatswana 
Bophuthatswana is an independant Bantu territory in South Africa. It was 
established by the then apartheid govenment of South Africa to 
consolidate their policy of apartheid.  
 
Borbonnais 
Borbonnais was once a province in France, and later a duchy.  
 
Bordeaux 
Bordeaux is a port on the Garonne and capital of Aquitaine in south west 
France.  
 
Borders 
The Borders are a region of Scotland. 
 
Boreham 
Boreham is a village in Essex.  
 
Borneo 
Borneo is an island in the east Indian archipelago. 
 
Boscombe 
Boscombe is a village in Wiltshire. 
 
Bosham 
Bosham is the most westerly town in Sussex. It was here that King Cnut 
demonstrated that even he had not the pwoer to turn back the sea.  
 
Bosnia 
Bosnia is a country in south east Europe. Part of Yugolsavia. 
 
Bosporus 
The Bosporus is a 27km long strait joining the Black Sea with the Sea of 
Marmara and forming part of the water division between Europe and Asia.  
 
Boston 
Boston is the capital of Massachusetts. 
 
Botany Bay 
Botany Bay is an inlet on the east coast of Australia. It was chosen in 
1787 as the site for a penal colony.  
 
Botswana 
Botswana is a country in southern Africa. It has a total area of 600,370 
km2. 
The climate is semiarid; warm winters and hot summers. 
The terrain is predominately flat to gently rolling tableland; Kalahari 
Desert in southwest 
Natural resources are diamonds, copper, nickel, salt, soda ash, potash, 
coal, iron ore, silver, natural gas. 
The religion is 50% indigenous beliefs, 50% Christian. 
The language is  English (official), Setswana  
 
Bourg 
Bourg is a town in Eastern France.  
 
Bourges 
Bourges is an ancient city in France. It is at the confluence of the 
Auron and Yevre 200 km south of Paris. 
 
Bourgogne 
Bourgogne is a region of France and former independant kingdom. It was 
incorporated into France in 1477.  
 
Bournemouth 
Bournemouth is a seaside resort in Hampshire. It was a small village 
until the 19th century and it has been growing ever since. 
 
Bouvet Island 
Bouvet Island is an island in Antarctica. It has a total area of 58 km2. 
The climate is antarctic. 
The terrain is volcanic; maximum elevation about 800 meters; the coast is 
mostly inacessible.  
 
Bovington 
Bovington is a village in Dorset. It is the site of the British Army tank 
research centre and museum. 
 
Box Hill 
Box Hill is a 700 foot high hill in Surrey. It is a popular beauty spot.  
 
Brabant 
Brabant is a former duchy of western Europe comprising part of Belgium 
and the Netherlands. 
 
Bradford 
Bradford is an industrial city in west Yorkshire in England. It is 14km 
west of Leeds. It was once an important wool and later cloth 
manufacturing centre but this has declined since the 1970s.  
 
Bradford Abbas 
Bradford Abbas is a village in Dorset.  
 
Brading 
Brading was a harbour on the Isle of Wight, however since 1880 a 2 km 
long causeway has cut off the town from the sea.  
 
Brahmaputra 
The Brahmaputra is a 2900km long river in Asia. It is a tributary of the 
Ganges.  
 
Braintree 
Braintree is a town in Essex. It formed around the junction of important 
Roman roads. Braintree derived its prosperity from the silk trade which 
followed the wool trade. 
 
Bramber 
Bramber is a village in Sussex. It is the site of the Exhibition of 
Humerous Taxidermy, a museum established in the late 19th century by 
William Potter.  
 
Brancaster 
Brancaster is a village in Norfolk. It was originally a Roman fort 
(Branodunum).  
 
Brand's Hatch 
Brand's Hatch is a motor racing circuit in Kent.  
 
Brandenburg 
Brandenburg is a former Prussian and German province. It was divided in 
1945 between Poland and Germany.  
 
Brasil 
Brasil is the Brazilian name for Brazil.  
 
Brasov 
Brasov is an industrial town in Romania at the foot of the Transylvanian 
Alps. It was part of Hungary until 1920. 
 
Brasso 
Brasso is the Hunagarian name for the Romanian town of Brasov.  
 
Bratislava 
Bratislava (Pressburg) is an industrial port on the Danube in 
Czechoslovakia. 
 
Braunschweig 
Braunschweig is the German name for Brunswick.  
 
Bray 
Bray is a village in Berkshire set on a bend in the River Thames. A 17th 
century vicar of Bray continualy changed his religion in keeping with 
that of the King of the day inorder to keep his living, so the story 
goes. 
 
Brazil 
Brazil is the largest country in south America. It has a total area of 
8,511,965 km2. 
The climate is mostly tropical, but temperate in south. 
The terrain is mostly flat to rolling lowlands in north; some plains, 
hills, mountains, and narrow coastal belt 
Natural resources are iron ore, manganese, bauxite, nickel, uranium, 
phosphates, tin, hydropower, gold, platinum, crude oil, timber. 
The religion is 90% Roman Catholic (nominal). 
The language is  Portuguese (official), Spanish, English, French.  
 
Brazzaville 
Brazzaville is the capital city of the Congo. It is an industrial port on 
the Zaire river opposite Kinshasa.  
 
Breamore 
Breamore is a village on the edge of the New Forest in Hampshire. It is 
the site of one of the few complete Anglo-Saxon churches in England.  
 
Bremen 
Bremen is an old town on the banks of the river Weser in Germany 64km 
from the North Sea. It is an industrial and commercial centre.  
 
Brenner Pass 
The brenner pass is the lowest pass over the alps.  
 
Brentwood 
Brentwood is a town in Essex just off the main London to Chelmsford road. 
 
Brescia 
Brescia is an historic industrial city in northern Italy 84km east of 
Milan.  
 
Breslau 
Breslau is the German name of Wroclaw.  
 
Brest 
Brest is a naval base and industrial port on the Rade de Brest at the 
western extremity of Brittany, France.  
 
Bretagne 
Bretagne is the French name for Brittany. 
 
Bretton Woods 
Bretton Woods is a township in New Hampshire, USA.  
 
Breydon Water 
Breydon Water is an extension of the estuary of the River Yare in 
Norfolk. It was a natural harbour in Roman times. 
 
Bridgetown 
Bridgetown is a port and the capital city of Barbados. It was founded in 
1628.  
 
Bridgwater 
Bridgwater grew from being a village to a major river-port during the 
Middle Ages.  
 
Bridlington 
Bridlington is a sea-side resort town in north east England.  
 
Bridport 
Bridport is a town in Dorset. It was an important rope-making town once, 
hence the expression "Bridport Dagger" which referred to a hangman's 
noose.  
 
Brighton 
Brighton is a sea-side resort town in Sussex. It was formerly called 
Brighthelmstone. 
 
Brisbane 
Brisbane is the capital of Queensland in Australia. 
 
Bristol 
Bristol is a city at the confluence of the rivers Avon and Frome in west 
England. 
 
Britain 
Britain is the collective name for England, Scotland, Wales and northern 
Ireland. 
 
British Antarctic Territory 
The British Antarctic Territory is a colony created in 1962 and 
comprising all British territories south of latitude 60 degrees south.  
 
British Columbia 
British Columbia is a province of western Canada on the Pacific.  
 
British Honduras 
British Honduras is a former name of Belize.  
 
British Isles 
The British Isles are a group of islands off the north west coast of 
Europe consisting of Great Britain, Ireland, The Channel Islands, Orkney, 
Shetland, Isle of Man and other islands. 
 
Brittany 
Brittany is a region of north west France in the Breton peninsular 
between the Bay of Biscay and the English Channel. 
 
Brixen 
Brixen is an old city in Austria in the Tyrol.  
 
Brixham 
Brixham is a fishing port in Devon on Tor Bay.  
 
Brixia 
Brixia is the ancient name for Brescia. 
 
Brno 
Brno is an industrial city in central Czechoslovakia. 
 
Broads 
The Norfolk Broads are a combination of lakes, rivers and cuts in Norfolk 
famous for their boating. They are largely man made, water filled pits 
left by turf cutters of years ago. 
 
Broadway 
Broadway is a major street in Manhattan, New York, famed for its 
theatres.  
 
Brocken 
Brocken is the highest summit of the Harz mountains, 1141 metres. 
 
Brockenhurst 
Brockenhurst is a village in the New Forest in Hampshire. 
 
Brockville 
Brockville is a town in Ontario on the left bank of the St Lawrence 
 
Brownsea Island 
Brownsea Island is the largest island in Poole Harbour, in Dorset. It is 
2 km long and 1 km wide. 
 
Bruges 
Bruges is the capital of west Flanders. It is a mediaeval town connected 
by a canal to its port Zeebrugge.  
 
Brugge 
Brugge is the Flemish name for Bruges.  
 
Brunei 
Brunei is a country in the far east. It has a total area of 5,770 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid, rainy. 
The terrain is flat coastal plain rises to mountains in east; hilly 
lowland in west 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, timber. 
The religion is 60% Muslim (official); 8% Christian; 32% Buddhist and 
indigenous beliefs. 
The language is Malay (official), English, and Chinese.  
 
Brunswick 
Brunswick is an industrial city in Lower Saxony, Germany. It was the 
capital of the duchy of Brunswick from 1671. 
 
Brussel 
Brussel is the Flemish name for Brussels. 
 
Brussels 
Brussels is the capital of Belgium. It is an industrial city first 
settled in the 6th century, and a city from 1321. It became the capital 
of belgium in 1830.  
 
Bruton 
Bruton is a town in Somerset. 
 
Bucaramanga 
Bucaramanga is an industrial and commercial city in north central 
Columbia. It was founded by the Spanish in 1622.  
 
Bucharest 
Bucharest is the capital of Romania.  
 
Buchenwald 
Buchenwald was the site of a Nazi concentration camp in Germany during 
the Second World War.  
 
Buckingham 
Buckingham is a market town on the river Ouse in Buckinghamshire, 
England. It is 24km north west of Aylesbury.  
 
Buckinghamshire 
Buckinghamshire is a county in south east England.  
 
Bucuresti 
Bucuresti is the Romanian name for Bucharest. 
 
Budapest 
Budapest is the capital city of Hungary.  
 
Buenos Aires 
Buenos Aires is the capital city of Argentina.  
 
Bulawayo 
Bulawayo is an industrial city and railway junction in Zimbabwe on the 
River Matsheumlope.  
 
Bulgaria 
Bulgaria is a country in central Europe. It has a total area of 110,910 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; cold, damp winters; hot, dry summers. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with lowlands in north and south. 
Natural resources are bauxite, copper, lead, zinc, coal, timber, arable 
land 
The religion is religious background of population is 85% Bulgarian 
Orthodox, 13% Muslim, 0.8% Jewish, 0.7% Roman Catholic, 0.5% Protestant, 
Gregorian-Armenian, and other. 
The language is  Bulgarian; secondary languages closely correspond to the 
ethnic breakdown. 
 
Bunbury 
Bunbury is a town and seaport in Western Australia. 
 
Bungay 
Bungay is a market town in Suffolk. 
 
Burgenland 
Burgenland is a federal state in south east Austria.  
 
Burghclere 
Burghclere is a village in Hampshire. 
 
Burgundy 
Burgundy is a region in east France.  
 
Burma 
Burma is a country in Asia south of Tibet. It has a total area of 678,500 
km2. 
The climate is tropical monsoon; cloudy, rainy, hot, humid summers 
(southwest monsoon, June to September); less cloudy, scant rainfall, mild 
temperatures, lower humidity during winter (northeast monsoon, December 
to April). 
The terrain is central lowlands ringed by steep, rugged highlands. 
Natural resources are crude oil, timber, tin, antimony, zinc, copper, 
tungsten, lead, coal, some marble, limestone, precious stones, natural 
gas. 
The religion is 85% Buddhist, 15% animist beliefs, Muslim, Christian, or 
other. 
The language is Burmese; minority ethnic groups have their own languages. 
 
Burnham-on-crouch 
Burnham-on-Crouch is a town in Essex. It is an estuary town noted for its 
boat-building and yachting. 
 
Bursa 
Bursa is a city in north west Turkey. It was the capital of the Ottoman 
Empire from 1326 until 1423.  
 
Burundi 
Burundi is a country in east Africa. It has a total area of 27,830 km2. 
The climate is temperate, warm with the occasional frost in the uplands. 
The terrain is mostly rolling to hilly highland with some plains. 
Natural resources are nickel, uranium, rare earth oxide, peat, cobalt, 
copper, platinum (not yet exploited), vanadium 
The religion is about 67% Christian (62% Roman Catholic, 5% Protestant), 
32% indigenous beliefs, 1% Muslim. 
The language is Kirundi and French (official); Swahili (along Lake 
Tanganyika and in the Bujumbura area).  
 
Burwell 
Burwell is a village in Cambridgeshire. 
 
Bury St Edmunds 
Bury St Edmunds is a city in Suffolk. 
 
Buscot 
Buscot is a village in Berkshire next to the Thames.  
 
Byblos 
Byblos was an ancient Phoenician city 32km north of Beirut. Today it is 
called Jebeil.  
 
Byzantium 
Byzantium was the capital of the Byzantine Empire. Today it is called 
Istanbul. 
 
Cadarache 
Cadarache is a French nuclear research site north east of Aix-en-
Provence.  
 
Cadiz 
Cadiz is a city and seaport in Spain. 
 
Cagliari 
Cagliari is the capital of Sardinia in Italy. 
 
Cairo 
Cairo is the capital city of Egypt. 
 
Caister-on-Sea 
Caister-on-Sea is a seaside town in Norfolk on the outskirts of Great 
Yarmouth. It was a Roman town and also an Anglo-Saxon town in the past. 
 
Calabria 
Calabria is a mountainous earthquake region occupying the toe of Italy. 
 
Calais 
Calais is a seaport in France.  
 
Calcutta 
Calcutta is a city in India in the province of Bengal.  
 
Calgary 
Calgary is a city in Alberta, Canada. 
 
Cali 
Cali is a city in south west Colombia in the Cauca Valley. It was founded 
in 1536.  
 
California 
California is a state in the west USA.  
 
Callao 
Callao is the chief fishing and commercial port of Peru. It is 12km south 
west of Lima. It was founded in 1537 and destroyed by an earthquake in 
1746.  
 
Calleva Atrebatum 
Calleva Atrebatum was the Roman name for their settlement at what is now 
called Silchester. 
 
Calne 
Calne is a market town in Wiltshire.  
 
Camargue 
The Camargue is a marshy area of the Rhone delta south of Arles in 
France.  
 
Cambodia 
Cambodia is a country in the far east. South east of Thailand. It has a 
total area of 181,040 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy, monsoon season (May to October); dry 
season (December to March); little seasonal temperature variation. 
The terrain is mostly low, flat plains; mountains in southwest and north. 
Natural resources are timber, gemstones, some iron ore, manganese, 
phosphates, hydropower potential. 
The religion is 95% Theravada Buddhism, 5% other. 
The language is  Khmer (official), French 
 
Cambridge 
Cambridge is a famous university town situated on the river Cam 80 km 
north of London in Cambridgeshire.  
 
Cambridgeshire 
Cambridgeshire is a county in east England. 
 
Camden 
Camden is a port on the river Delaware in New Jersey, USA.  
 
Cameroon 
Cameroon is a country in west Africa. Most recently noted for it's 
football team's performance in the world cup. It has a total area of 
475,440 km2. 
The climate is varies with terrain from tropical along coast to semiarid 
and hot in north. 
The terrain is diverse with coastal plain in southwest, dissected plateau 
in center, mountains in west, plains in north. 
Natural resources are crude oil, bauxite, iron ore, timber, hydropower 
potential. 
The religion is 51% indigenous beliefs, 33% Christian, 16% Muslim. 
The language is  English and French (official), 24 major African language 
groups. 
 
Campeche 
Campeche is a Mexican port and capital of Campeche state. It was founded 
in 1540. 
 
Camulodunum 
Camulodunum was the Roman name for Colchester.  
 
Canaan 
Canaan is an area of the Palestinian coast. The people who lived in 
Canaan in the 1st millenium BC were known to the Greeks as Phoenicians. 
 
Canada 
Canada is a country occupying the northern most part of America. It has a 
total area of 9,976,140 km2. 
The climate is varies from temperate in south to subarctic and arctic in 
north. 
The terrain is mostly plains with mountains in west and lowlands in 
southeast. 
Natural resources are nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, 
potash, silver, fish, timber, wildlife, coal, crude oil, natural gas. 
The religion is 46% Roman Catholic, 16% United Church, 10% Anglican. 
The language is  English and French (both official). 
 
Canary Islands 
The Canary islands are an archipelago in the atlantic ocean off the north 
west coast of Africa. 
 
Canberra 
Canberra is a territory in Australia and also the capital city of 
Australia since 1908. 
 
Cantabria 
Cantabria is an autonomous region of northern Spain.  
 
Canterbury 
Canterbury is an ancient city in Kent.  
 
Canton 
A canton is a territorial division of Switzerland. 
Canton is the former name of Kwangchow in China. 
 
Canvey Island 
Canvey Island is an island in the Thames estuary in Essex.  
 
Cape Cod 
Cape Cod is a peninsular in south east Massachusetts, USA where in 1620 
the English Pilgrims landed at Provincetown.  
 
Cape Horn 
Cape Horn is the most southerly point of South America. 
 
Cape of Good Hope 
The Cape of Good Hope is a South African headland forming a peninsular 
between Table Bay and False Bay. 
 
Cape Province 
The Cape Province is the largest province of South Africa.  
 
Cape Town 
Cape Town is a city and seaport in South Africa.  
 
Cape Verde 
Cape Verde is a group of 14 volcanic islands in the Atlantic ocean. It 
has a total area of 4,030 km2. 
The climate is temperate; warm, dry, summer precipitation very erratic. 
The terrain is steep, rugged, rocky, volcanic. 
Natural resources are salt, basalt rock, pozzolana, limestone, kaolin, 
fish 
The religion is Roman Catholicism fused with indigenous beliefs. 
The language is Portuguese and Crioulo, a blend of Portuguese and West 
African words  
 
Capodimonte 
Capodimonte is a village north of Naples in Italy famous for its 
porcelain. 
 
Cappadocia 
Cappadocia is an ancient region of Asia Minor in modern east central 
Turkey.  
 
Capri 
Capri is a small island at the south entrance of the bay of Naples. It 
has an area of 4 square miles. 
 
Caracas 
Caracas is the capital of Venezuela.  
 
Carbonia 
Carbonia is a town in Sardinia. It was built in 1937. 
 
Carchemish 
Carchemish (now Karkamis) was the centre of the Hittite New Empire. 
 
Cardiff 
Cardiff is the capital of Wales. It is a port with docks on the Bristol 
Channel.  
 
Caribbean 
The Caribbean is the sea north of South America and east of Central 
America.  
 
Caribbean Sea 
The Caribbean Sea is part of the Atlantic Ocean between the noth coasts 
of South America and Central America and the West Indies. 
 
Carinthia 
Carinthia is an alpine federal state in south east Austria bordering 
Italy and Yugoslavia.  
 
Carlow 
Carlow is a county in the Republic of Ireland.  
 
Carmarthenshire 
Carmarthenshire was once a county in south Wales. It was merged with 
Cardigan and Pembroke in 1974 to form Dyfed. 
 
Carmona 
Carmona is a town in Spain. 
 
Carniola 
Carniola was a duchy of Austria.  
 
Carolina 
North Carolina and South Carolina are states in the USA.  
 
Caroline islands 
The Caroline islands are an archipelago in the north west Pacific.  
 
Carpathians 
The carpathians are a mountain range in central Europe. 
 
Cartagena 
Cartagena is a port and industrial city in north west Colombia. 
 
Carthage 
Carthage was an ancient city on the north west coast of Africa. 
 
Casablanca 
Casablanca is a port and commercial and industrial centre on the Atlantic 
coast of Morocco. 
 
Caspian 
The Caspian sea is a large salt water lake between Europe and Asia. It is 
the world's largest inland sea at 422,170 km2. It is fed by the River 
Volga.  
 
Caspian Sea 
see "Caspian" 
 
Casquets 
The Casquets are dangerous rocks 11 km west of Aldernay.  
 
Castile 
Castile is an historic kingdom in central Spain.  
 
Castilla-La Mancha 
Castilla-La Mancha is an autonomous region of central Spain.  
 
Castilla-Leon 
Castilla-Leon is an autonomous region of central Spain. 
 
Castries 
Castries is a port and capital city of St. Lucia on the north west coast 
of the island. 
 
Catalonia 
Catalonia is an autonomous region in north east Spain.  
 
Caucasus 
The Caucasus are a series of mountain ranges between the Caspian Sea and 
the Black Sea. 
 
Cavendish 
Cavendish is a village in Suffolk. It is the former ancestoral village of 
the Dukes of Devonshire.  
 
Cawston 
Cawston is a village in Norfolk 19 km north west of Norwich.  
 
Cayenne 
Cayenne is the capital of French Guiana.  
 
Cayman 
The Cayman are 3 islands in the caribbean west and north of Jamaica. They 
have a total area of 260 km2. 
The climate is tropical marine with warm, rainy summers (May to October) 
and cool, relatively dry winters (November to April). 
The terrain is a low-lying limestone base surrounded by coral reefs. 
Natural resources are fish, the climate and beaches that foster tourism. 
The religion is United Church (Presbyterian and Congregational), 
Anglican, Baptist, Roman Catholic, Church of God, other Protestant 
denominations. 
The language is English. 
They were first settled by military deserters in the 17th century, and 
became home to pirates in the 18th century. They were then administered 
along with Jamaica until independance in 1962.  
 
Cebu 
Cebu is a city and Island in the Philippines. 
 
Celebes 
Celebes is the English name for the Indonesian island of Sulawesi.  
 
Central African Republic 
The Central African Republic is a country in Africa. It has a total area 
of 622,980 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, dry winters; mild to hot, wet summers. 
The terrain is vast, flat to rolling, monotonous plateau; scattered hills 
in northeast and southwest. 
Natural resources are diamonds, uranium, timber, gold, oil. 
The religion is 24% indigenous beliefs, 25% Protestant, 25% Roman 
Catholic, 15% Muslim, 11% other; animistic beliefs and practices strongly 
influence the Christian majority. 
The language is  French (official); Sangho (lingua franca and national 
language); Arabic, Hunsa, Swahili. 
 
Central America 
Central America is the isthmus connecting north and south America.  
 
Cephalonia 
Cephalonia is the largest of the Ionian islands off the west coast of 
Greece. It has an area of 260 square miles. 
 
Ceuta 
Ceuta is a coastal town in Morocco but owned by Spain.  
 
Ceylon 
Ceylon was the name for what is now called Sri Lanka. 
 
Chablais 
Chablais is a district of France south of Lake Geneva.  
 
Chad 
Chad is a country in Africa. It has a total area of 1,284,000 km2. 
The climate is tropical in south, desert in north. 
The terrain is broad, arid plains in center, desert in north, mountains 
in northwest, lowlands in south. 
Natural resources are small quantities of crude oil (unexploited but 
exploration beginning), uranium, natron, kaolin, fish (Lake Chad) 
The religion is 44% Muslim, 33% Christian, 23% indigenous beliefs, 
animism. 
The language is  French and Arabic (official); Sara and Sango in south; 
more than 100 different languages and dialects are spoken.  
 
Chahar 
Chahar was once a province in China. It was divided in 1947 between Inner 
Mongolia, Shansi and Hopei. 
 
Chaldaea 
Chaldaea was in ancient times, the southerly part of Babylonia. 
 
Chale 
Chale is a coastal village on the Isle of Wight.  
 
Champagne 
Champagne is a region of France famed for its sparkling wine. 
 
Chandernagore 
Chandernagore is a city in India, 35 km north of Calcutta in the state of 
West Bengal.  
 
Chandigarh 
Chandigarh is a city in India. Capital of the Punjab. 
 
Chang Jian 
The Chang Jian is the longest river in China. It flows 6300km from Tibet 
to the Yellow Sea. 
 
Changchun 
Changchun is an industrial city and the capital city of Jilin province, 
China.  
 
Changsha 
Changsha is a river port on the Chang Jiang River. It is the capital city 
of Hunan province, China. 
 
Channel island 
see "channel islands" 
 
Channel islands 
The Channel islands are a group of British owned islands in the English 
channel off the north west coast of France. 
 
Chard 
Chard is a town in Somerset.  
 
Charing 
Charing is a village in Kent. 
 
Charlottesville 
Charlottesville is a town in Virginia USA. It stands on the banks of the 
river Rivanna. 
 
Charmouth 
Charmouth is a coastal village in Dorset famed for its fossils. 
 
Chatham 
Chatham is a naval town in Kent.  
 
Chawton 
Chawton is a village in Hampshire 2 km south of Alton.  
 
Cheddar Gorge 
Cheddar Gorge is a 2 km long limestone gorge in Somerset. 
 
Chefoo 
Chefoo is a port in Shantung province, China. 
 
Chekiang 
Chekiang is a province of China.  
 
Chelmsford 
Chelmsford is a market town in Essex, England 48 km north east of London. 
 
Cheltenham 
Cheltenham is a spa and resort town in England. It stands at the foot of 
the Cotswolds on the Chelt river.  
 
Chelyabinsk 
Chelyabinsk is an industrial town and capital of Chelyabinsk region in 
western Siberia. 
 
Chengchow 
Chengchow is capital of Honan province. 
 
Chengdu 
Chengdu (formerly Chengtu) is an ancient city and capital of Sichuan 
province, China. 
 
Cher 
The Cher is a river in central France. It is a 322 km long tributary of 
the Loire which it enters near Tours. 
 
Chernobyl 
Chernobyl is a town in the Ukraine. 
 
Cheshire 
Cheshire is a county in north west England. 
 
Chesil Bank 
The Chesil Bank is a huge bank of shingle which connects Portland with 
mainland England and extends north west almost to Brisport. It is 29 km 
long.  
 
Cheviot hills 
see "Cheviots" 
 
Cheviots 
The Cheviots are a range of hills 56km long mainly in Northumberland, 
forming part of the border between England and Scotland.  
 
Chianti 
Chianti is a mountain region in Tuscany. It lends its name to the localy 
made dry red and white wines.  
 
Chicago 
Chicago is a city in Illinois, on the south shore of Lake Michigan. It 
has the 2nd largest population of American cities. 
 
Chichen Itza 
Chichen Itza is a Mayan city in Yucatan, Mexico.  
 
Chichester 
Chichester is the county town of West Sussex. It is an ancient city, 
formely called Noviomagus by the Romans when they established a base here 
in 43. 
 
Chideock 
Chideock is a village in Dorset.  
 
Chilcomb 
Chilcomb is a small village in Hampshire 3 km from Winchester.  
 
Chile 
Chile is a country in west South America. It is bordered by the Pacific. 
It has a total area of 756,950 km2. 
The climate is temperate; desert in north; cool and damp in south. 
The terrain is low coastal mountains; fertile central valley; rugged 
Andes in east. 
Natural resources are copper, timber, iron ore, nitrates, precious 
metals, molybdenum. 
The religion is 89% Roman Catholic, 11% Protestant, and small Jewish 
population. 
The language is  Spanish. 
 
Chilhuahua 
Chilhuahua is the capital of Chilhuahua state, Mexico.  
 
Chiltern Hills 
The Chiltern Hills are a chalk escarpment in England. Their highest point 
is near Wendover which is 276m high.  
 
China 
China is a country in east Asia. It is divided into provinces and has a 
total area of 9,596,960 km2. 
The climate is extremely diverse; tropical in south to subarctic in 
north. 
The terrain is mostly mountains, high plateaus, deserts in west; plains, 
deltas, and hills in east. 
Natural resources are coal, iron ore, crude oil, mercury, tin, tungsten, 
antimony, manganese, molybdenum, vanadium, magnetite, aluminum, lead, 
zinc, uranium, world's largest hydropower potential. 
The religion is officially atheist, but traditionally pragmatic and 
eclectic; most important elements of religion are Confucianism, Taoism, 
and Buddhism; about 2-3% Muslim, 1% Christian. 
The language is  Standard Chinese (Putonghua) or Mandarin (based on the 
Beijing dialect); also Yue (Cantonese), Wu (Shanghainese), Minbei 
(Fuzhou), Minnan (Hokkien-Taiwanese), Xiang, Gan, Hakka dialects, and 
minority languages.  
 
China Sea 
The China sea is a western division of the Pacific ocean. 
 
Chios 
Chios is one of the Greek islands.  
 
Chippenham 
Chippenham is a market town in Wiltshire. 
 
Chislehurst 
Chislehurst is a village in Kent. It was an important Druid centre in 
ancient times. It is the site of a labyrinth of caves and tunnels which 
were used during the Second World War as an air-raid shelter for some 
15000 people. 
 
Chittagong 
Chittagong is a city and port in Bangladesh, 16km from the mouth of the 
Karnaphuli river on the Bay of Bengal.  
 
Chogori 
see "K2" 
 
Chongqing 
Chongqing is a city in Sichuan province, China. 
 
Christchurch 
Christchurch is a town in Hampshire adjoining Bournemouth at the junction 
of the Stour and the Avon. Christchurch is a city on South Island, New 
Zealand on the Avon. 
 
Christmas island 
Christmas island is an atoll in the Indian ocean. 
 
Cisalpine 
Cisalpine was the southern region of the Roman province of Gallia (north 
Italy).  
 
Ciskel 
Ciskel is a Bantu homeland in South Africa. 
 
Clacton-on-sea 
Clacton-on-sea is a seaside holiday resort town in Essex. 
 
Clare 
Clare is a town in Suffolk on the Melford to Haverhill road. 
Clare is a county on the west coast of Ireland.  
 
Cleeve Cloud 
Cleeve Cloud is the highest point in the Cotswolds. It is 309m above sea 
level. 
 
Clermont-Ferrand 
Clermont-Ferrand is the capital city of Puy-de-Dome department in the 
Auvergne region of France.  
 
Cleveland 
Cleveland is a county in north east England. 
Cleveland is a large city in Ohio, USA.  
 
Clovelly 
Clovelly is a fishing village in Devon. 
 
Cludad Juarez 
Cludad Juarez is a city on the Rio Grande in Chihuahua state in north 
Mexico. 
 
Clwyd 
Clwyd is a county in north Wales. 
 
Clyde 
The Clyde is a river which flows 170 km through Strathclyde region of 
south west Scotland through Glasgow.  
 
Coal Market 
Coal Market, offically called Crescent, is a small rural community beside 
the main Spanish Town to Bog Walk road in Jamaica. It is a strongly PNP 
ghetto, and not a place tourists should visit unarmed. Across the road is 
the notorious River Side go-go club where many an unsuspecting tourist 
has been robbed by the prostitutes who work there. 
 
Coban 
Coban is a market town in Guatemala.  
 
Cobham 
Cobham is a former Roman town in Kent.  
 
Cochin 
Cochin is a sea port in Kerala, India.  
 
Cochin China 
Cochin China is the Mekong Delta region which was part of Indo-China, but 
is now south Vietnam. 
 
Coco 
The Coco River flows 480 km to the Caribbean sea through Honduras and 
Nicaragua.  
 
Cocos Islands 
The Cocos Islands (Keeling Islands) are 20 small coral islands in the 
Indian ocean. Their total area of 14 km2. 
The climate is pleasant, modified by the southeast trade winds for about 
nine months of the year; moderate rainfall 
The terrain is flat, low-lying coral atolls. 
The only natural resource is fish. 
The language is  English  
 
Coddenham 
Coddenham is a village in Suffolk. It was a Roman settlement, called 
Combretonium.  
 
Coggeshall 
Coggeshall is a village in Essex on the old Roman road from Colchester to 
the West Country. 
 
Colchester 
Colchester is a town in Essex. It was founded before the Romans and was 
previously called Camulodunum. It stands on the river Colne.  
 
Colditz 
Colditz is a town in eastern Germany. It is the site of a castle used as 
a prisoner of war camp by the Nazis during the second World War where 
habitual escapers were kept. 
 
Colima 
Colima is a volcano in Mexico. It is 3850 metres high.  
 
Cologne 
Cologne is an industrial and commercial port in Germany.  
 
Colombia 
Colombia is a country in South America. It has a total area of 1,138,910 
km2 
The climate is tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in 
highlands. 
The terrain is mixture of flat coastal lowlands, plains in east, central 
highlands, some high mountains. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel, 
gold, copper, emeralds. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic. 
The language is  Spanish 
 
Colombo 
Colombo is the capital city of Sri Lanka. 
 
Colorado 
Colorado is a west central state of the USA.  
 
Colorado Desert 
The Colorado Desert is an irrigated area in California, USA.  
 
Coltishall 
Coltishall is a village in Norfolk. The RAF have a station 3 km north of 
the village. 
 
Colton 
Colton is a market town in south east California. 
 
Columbia 
Columbia is the state capital of South Carolina. 
The Columbia River is a major river in north America. It rises in the 
rocky mountains and flows 2240 km. 
 
Colyton 
Colyton is a small town in Devon. 
 
Comayaguela 
Comayaguela is a city and former capiyal of Hinduras. 
 
Combretonium 
Combretonium was the Roman name for Coddenham in Suffolk. 
 
Como 
Lake Como is a tourist resort in Italy. It has spectacular mountain 
scenery.  
 
Comoros 
Comoros is an archipelago in the Indian Ocean. It has a total area of 
2,170 km2 
The climate is tropical marine; rainy season (November to May). 
The terrain is volcanic islands, interiors vary from steep mountains to 
low hills. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is 86% Sunni Muslim, 14% Roman Catholic. 
The language is Shaafi Islam (a Swahili dialect), Malagasy, French.  
 
Compton 
Compton is a village in Surrey 5 km from Guidford.  
 
Conakry 
Conakry is the capital of Guinea. It is a port on the island of Tumbo 
linked with the mainland by a causeway. 
 
Concord 
Concord is a town in California, USA. It is a residential and commercial 
center in the San Francisco area. 
Concord is a textile producing town in Massachusetts, USA. 
 
Concordia 
Concordia is a port on the Uruguay River in Argentina.  
 
Congleton 
Congleton is a town in east Cheshire on the south west margin of the 
Pennines in England. 
 
Congo 
The Congo is a republic in west central Africa. It has a total area of 
342,000 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (March to June); dry season (June 
to October); constantly high temperatures and humidity; particularly 
enervating climate astride the Equator. 
The terrain is coastal plain, southern basin, central plateau, northern 
basin. 
Natural resources are petroleum, timber, potash, lead, zinc, uranium, 
copper, phosphates, natural gas. 
The religion is 50% Christian, 48% animist, 2% Muslim. 
The language is French (official); many African languages with Lingala 
and Kikongo most widely used.  
 
Coniston 
Coniston is a town in Ontario, Canada. It was built by and for the local 
nickel mining company. 
 
Connacht 
Connacht is a province in west Ireland. 
 
Connaught Tunnel 
The Connaught Tunnel is a 8 km long railway tunnel under mount Sir Donald 
in Canada. It is the longset tunnel in north America. 
 
Connecticut 
Connecticut is a state in the USA.  
 
Constantinople 
Constantinople is the former name of Istanbul.  
 
Content 
Content is a small rural bush community beside the Rio Cobra river in 
Jamaica between Bog Walk and Spanish Town.  
 
Continent 
A continent is a continuous land mass.  
 
Cook 
Captain James Cook was an English sailor and explorer. In 1768 he sailed 
around the world. He discovered Easter island in 1772. 
 
Cook islands 
The Cook islands are a group of polynesian islands north east of New 
Zealand. They have a total area of 240 km2. 
The climate is tropical; moderated by trade winds. 
The terrain is low coral atolls in north; volcanic, hilly islands in 
south. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is Christian, majority of populace members of Cook Islands 
Christian Church . 
The language is English. 
 
Cook Strait 
The cook strait is the water separating north and south New Zealand.  
 
Cookham 
Cookham is a village in Berkshire.  
 
Copenhagen 
Copenhagen is the capital of Denmark. 
 
Copford 
Copford is a village in Essex.  
 
Coral Sea 
The Coral Sea is part of the Pacific Ocean lying between north east 
Australia, New Guinea, The Solomon Islands, New Hebrides and New 
Caledonia. 
 
Cordilleras 
The Cordilleras are a mountainous western section of North America. 
 
Corfu 
Corfu is the most northerly, and second largest of the Ionian islands.  
 
Cork 
Cork is the largest county of the Republic of Ireland.  
 
Cornwall 
Cornwall is a county in south west England. 
 
Corregidor 
Corregidor is an island at the mouth of Manila Bay, Luzon, Philippines. 
 
Corsica 
Corsica is an island in the Mediterranean west of Italy and owned by 
France.  
 
Cos 
Cos (Kos) island is a Greek island in the Aegean sea. It is the 2nd 
largest of the Dodecanese islands and gives its name to the cos lettuce.  
 
Costa Rica 
Costa Rica is a republic in Central America. It has a total area of 
51,100 km2. 
The climate is tropical; dry season (December to April); rainy season 
(May to November). 
The terrain is coastal plains separated by rugged mountains. 
Natural resources are the potential for hydropower. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic. 
The language is Spanish (official), English spoken around Puerto Limon. 
 
Cotacachi 
Cotacachi is a volcano in Ecuador. It is 4937 metres high.  
 
Cote d'Or 
The Cote d'Or is a department in east France. It is the heart of ancient 
Burgundy.  
 
Cotonou 
Cotonou is the chief port and the largest city in Benin.  
 
Cotopaxi 
Cotopaxi is the worlds highest volcano. It stands 5978 metres tall in 
Ecuador.  
 
Cotswold Hills 
see "Cotswolds" 
 
Cotswolds 
The Cotswold Hills (Cotswolds) are a limestone escarpment in 
Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire. They are the source of the River Thames.  
 
County 
A county is an administrative unit of a country.  
 
County Down 
County Down is a county in south east Northern Ireland. 
 
Covehithe 
Covehithe is a village in Suffolk. It was once a town, but declined in 
the 17th century into a village. 
 
Coventry 
Coventry is an industrial city in the West Midlands, England. It suffered 
heavy bombing during the Second World War.  
 
Cranborne 
Cranborne was once a market town, it is now a village in Dorset.  
 
Cranbrook 
Cranbrook is a market town in Kent. In the 15th century it was the centre 
of the local weaving industry.  
 
Cranleigh 
Cranleigh is a country town in Surrey.  
 
Crawley 
Crawley is a town in Sussex. The old town dates back to the 14th century 
at least. A new town was built around as an overspill for London in the 
1970s. 
 
Crete 
Crete is the largest Greek island.  
 
Cricklade 
Cricklade is a town in north Wiltshire on the River Thames 13 km north 
west of Swindon. It was a fortified township during Anglo-Saxon times. 
 
Crimea 
The crimea is the north peninsular region of the Ukraine. 
 
Croatia 
Croatia is a republic in Europe. Part of Yugolsavia.  
 
Cromer 
Cromer is a seaside resort town in Norfolk. 
 
Crowhurst 
Crowhurst is a village in Surrey. 
 
Croydon 
Croydon was once a village in Surrey. Since 1820 Croydon has grown to 
become a suburb of greater-London.  
 
Ctesiphon 
Ctesiphon is the ruined royal city of the Parthians and later capital of 
the Sassanian empire, 19km south east of Baghdad.  
 
Cuba 
Cuba is a large island in the Caribbean off the south coast of Florida. 
It has a total area of 110,860 km2. 
The climate is tropical; moderated by trade winds; dry season (November 
to April); rainy season (May to October). 
The terrain is mostly flat to rolling plains with rugged hills and 
mountains in the southeast. 
Natural resources are cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, manganese, salt, 
timber, silica. 
The religion was at least 85% nominally Roman Catholic before Castro 
assumed power. 
The language is Spanish.  
 
Cumae 
Cumae is an ancient city in Italy on the coast 16km west of Naples. 
 
Cumberland 
Cumberland is a former county of north west England.  
 
Cumbria 
Cumbria is a county in north west England.  
 
Curacao 
Curacao is an island in the Caribbean.  
 
Cuzco 
Cuzco is a city in south Peru and capital of Cuzco department. It was the 
capital city of the ancient Inca empire.  
 
Cyprus 
Cyprus is an island in the eastern mediterranean. 
 
Cyrenaica 
Cyrenaica is an area of east Libya which was colonized by the Greeks in 
the 7th century BC and later held by the Egyptians, Romans, Arabs, Turks 
and Italians.  
 
Czechoslovakia 
Czechoslovakia is a land locked country in east central Europe. It has a 
total area of 127,870 km2. 
The climate is temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters. 
The terrain is mixture of hills and mountains separated by plains and 
basins. 
Natural resources are coal, timber, lignite, uranium, magnesite, iron 
ore, copper, zinc. 
The religion is 50% Roman Catholic, 20% Protestant, 2% Orthodox, 28% 
other. 
The language is  Czech and Slovak (official), Hungarian.  
 
Dacca 
see "Dhaka" 
 
Dachau 
Dachau was the site of a Nazi concentration camp during the Second World 
War in Bavaria.  
 
Dacia 
Dacia was a region of ancient Europe, north of the Danube occupied by the 
Getae, and then later a Roman province. 
 
Dagenham 
Dagenham is an industrial town on the River Thames in Essex. It is host 
to the Ford motor car factory.  
 
Dagestan 
Dagestan is a Caucasian republic, formerly part of the Soviet Union. It 
is a mountainous country with a small population for its area, 
approximately 50000 square kilometers. 
 
Dahomey 
Dahomey is the former name (until 1975) of Benin. 
 
Dakar 
Dakar is the capital of Senegal.  
 
Dalalven 
The Dalalven is a 520 km long river in south central Sweden used for 
transporting timber. 
 
Dalkey 
Dalkey is a town in the republic of Ireland on the west coast 6km north 
of the Wicklow border. It is a residential resort town. 
 
Dallas 
Dallas is an industrial town in Texas. It has been made famous by a soap 
opera of the same name.  
 
Daman 
Daman is a seaport in India on the Gulf of Cambay, 161 km north of 
Bombay. It was conquered by the Protugese in 1531 who made it a permanent 
settlement in 1558.  
 
Damanhur 
Damanhur is a market town on the west margin of the Nile delta, 40 km 
south east of Alexandria in Egypt.  
 
Damascus 
Damascus is the capital of Syria. 
 
Dambovitta 
The Dambovitta is a river in Romania. It rises in Mount Omul in the 
Transylvanian Alps and flows south through Bucharest to the River Danube. 
 
Damietta 
Damietta is an ancient town in Egypt on one of the principal branches of 
the Nile some few miles from the mouth of the river. 
 
Danbury 
Danbury is a small village in Essex.  
 
Danelagh 
Danelagh (Danelaw) was the ancient name of a strip of land extending 
along the east coast of England from the Thames to the Tweed. It was 
ceded by Alfred to Guthrun, King of the Danes, after the battle of 
Ethandune. The inhabitants were governed by a modification of Danish law, 
rather than English law until the Norman conquest when it was captured by 
the Normans. 
 
Danewerk 
Danewerk was an ancient wall some 9 to 12 metres high extending along the 
southern frontier of Schleswig from the North Sea to the Baltic. It was 
built in the 10th century and destroyed in 1864 after being captured by 
the Austrians and Prussians.  
 
Danube 
The Danube is the 2nd longest river in Europe.  
 
Danzig 
Danzig is the German name for Gdansk. 
 
Dar es Salaam 
Dar es Salaam is a seaport in Tanzania. It was the capital until 1974.  
 
Dardanelles 
The Dardanelles is a Turkish strait connecting the Sea of Marmara with 
the Aegean Sea.  
 
Dartford 
Dartford is an industrial town in Kent. 
 
Dartmouth 
Dartmouth is a seaport in Devon on the mouth of the river Dart. 
 
Darwin 
Darwin is the capital of the Northern Territory, Australia. 
 
Dawlish 
Dawlish is a seaside resort town in Devon.  
 
Dead Sea 
The dead sea is a large lake partly in Israel and partly in Jordan. 
 
Death Valley 
Death valley is a 225 km long depression in south east California.  
 
Debenham 
Debenham is a village in Suffolk at the source of the River Deben.  
 
Debrecen 
Debrecen is the third largest city in Hungary 193km east of Budapest. 
 
Dee 
The River Dee rises in the Cairngorn Mountains in west Aberdeenshire and 
flows 140 km to the North Sea at Aberdeen. 
 
Deira 
Deira was an ancient Anglian kingdom. It stretched from the Tees to 
Humber, and inland to the borders of the British realm of Strathclyde. 
With Bernicia it formed the Kingdom of Northumbria.  
 
Delaware 
Delaware is a state in north east USA.  
 
Delhi 
Delhi is a union territory in India. 
Delhi is the capital city of delhi territory, India. 
 
Delphi 
Delphi was a city of ancient Greece.  
 
Demerara 
Demerara is a region in Guyana which has leant its name to raw cane 
sugar.  
 
Denmark 
Denmark is a kingdom in northern Europe, north of Germany. It has a total 
area of 43,070 km2. 
The climate is temperate; humid and overcast; mild, windy winters and 
cool summers. 
The terrain is low and flat to gently rolling plains. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, fish, salt, limestone. 
The religion is 97% Evangelical Lutheran, 2% other Protestant and Roman 
Catholic, 1% other. 
The language is Danish, Faroese, Greenlandic (an Eskimo dialect); small 
German-speaking minority.  
 
Denver 
Denver is a village in Norfolk on the edge of the Fens. It is host to a 
13th century church.  
 
Derby 
Derby is an industrial city in Derbyshire, England. 
 
Derbyshire 
Derbyshire is a county in north central England.  
 
Derwent 
The River Derwent rises on the Yorkshire Moors and flows 92 km to the 
Ouse. 
 
Desert 
A desert is an area without sufficient vegetation to support human life.  
 
Detroit 
Detroit is a city in Michigan, USA. 
The Detroit is a River in the USA.  
 
Devizes 
Devizes is an old market town in Wiltshire. 
 
Devon 
Devon is a county in south west England.  
 
Dhaka 
Dhaka (Dacca) is the capital of Bangladesh. 
 
Dijon 
Dijon is the capital city of Cote d'Or in France. 
 
Dili 
Dili is the capital of East Timor.  
 
Diss 
Diss is a town in Norfolk 29km south west of Norwich. It was once 
renowned for the manufacture of Suffolk hempen cloth. 
 
Dixie 
Dixie is a name given to the southern states of the USA.  
 
Djibouti 
Djibouti is a republic in Arabia. It has a total area of 22,000 km2. 
The climate is desert; torrid, dry. 
The terrain is coastal plain and plateau separated by central mountains. 
Natural resources are geothermal areas. 
The religion is 94% Muslim, 6% Christian. 
The language is French (official); Arabic, Somali, and Afar widely used.  
 
Dnepropetrovsk 
Dnepropetrovsk is a city in the Ukraine.  
 
Dnieper 
The Dnieper is a river in Russia. It rises in Smolensk and flows 2250 km 
south to the Black Sea east of Odessa. 
 
Dodoma 
Dodoma replaced Dar es Salaam as the capital of Tanzania in 1974. 
 
Doha 
Doha is the capital of Qatar. 
 
Dominica 
Dominica is an island in the Caribbean. 
 
Dominican Republic 
The Dominican Republic is a country in the east of the island Hispaniola. 
It has a total area of 48,730 km2. 
The climate is tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature variation. 
The terrain is rugged highlands and mountains with fertile valleys 
interspersed. 
Natural resources are nickel, bauxite, gold, silver. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic. 
The language is Spanish.  
 
Don 
The don is a river in Russia. It rises south of Moscow and flows 1900 km 
to the Sea of Azov.  
 
Donegal 
Donegal is a sea port in County Donegal, Ireland. 
 
Donetsk 
Donetsk is a city in the Ukraine. 
 
Dong Ting 
The Dong Ting is a large lake in Hunan province, China. It receives water 
from the Xi Jiang and Yuan rivers.  
 
Dorchester 
Dorchester is a market town in Dorset, England on the River Frome.  
 
Dordogne 
The Dordogne is a river in south west France. 
 
Dorking 
Dorking is a market town in the Mole Valley, Surrey, England. 
 
Dornoch 
Dornoch is a resort town in Scotland. 
 
Dorset 
Dorset is a county in south west England. 
 
Dortmund 
Dortmund is an industrial centre in the Ruhr, Germany.  
 
Douglas 
Douglas is the capital of the Isle of Man.  
 
Douro 
The Douro is a river in Spain. It flows 800 km through northern Portugal 
to the Atlantic at Oporto. 
 
Downe 
Downe is a quiet village in Kent. 
 
Downham Market 
Downham Market is a town in Norfolk on the River Ouse 19 km south of 
Kings Lynn. It was an important settlement in Roman times. 
 
Drayton 
Drayton is an agricultural town in Berkshire. It was a village prior to 
the Great War.  
 
Dresden 
Dresden is a city in Germany, it was razed to the ground by allied 
bombing. 
 
Dublin 
Dublin is the capital of Ireland. It is situated at the mouth of the 
River Liffey in south east Ireland.  
 
Dudley 
Dudley is a town in the West Midlands.  
 
Dumfries 
Dumfries is a region of Scotland. 
 
Dumfriesshire 
Dumfriesshire is a former county of southern Scotland.  
 
Dun Laoghaire 
Dun Laoghaire is a port and suburb of Dublin, Ireland.  
 
Dunbartonshire 
Dunbartonshire is a former county of Scotland.  
 
Dundee 
Dundee is a city and fishing port on the north side of the Firth of Tay, 
Scotland.  
 
Dunedin 
Dunedin is a port on Otago harbour, South Island, New Zealand.  
 
Dunfermline 
Dunfermline is an industrial town in Fife, Scotland.  
 
Dungeness 
Dungeness is an expanse of shingle jutting into the sea at the edge of 
Romney Marsh in Kent.  
 
Dunkirk 
Dunkirk is a town and port in north France. It was the scene of a massive 
evacuation of allied troops during the second world war.  
 
Dunwich 
Dunwich is a village in Suffolk. It was once a thriving town, but today 
is an isolated seaside resort.  
 
Durban 
Durban is the principle seaport of Natal. 
 
Durham 
Durham is a county in north east England. 
 
Dushanbe 
Dushanbe is the capital of Tadzhik. It was previously called Stalinabad.  
 
Dusseldorf 
Dusseldorf is an industrial city on the right bank of the Rhine, Germany. 
 
Dutch Guiana 
Dutch Guiana is a former Dutch colony which became Suriname in 1948.  
 
Dvina 
The dvina is a river in Russia. It flows to the white sea at Arkhangelsk. 
 
Dyfed 
Dyfed is a county in south west Wales.  
 
Dymchurch 
Dymchurch is a seaside resort in Kent.  
 
Ealing 
Ealing is a borough of London.  
 
East Anglia 
East Anglia is a region in east England.  
 
East Clandon 
East Clandon is a village near Guildford in Surrey. 
 
East Grinstead 
East Grinstead is a town in Sussex. 
 
East Sussex 
East Sussex is a county in south east England.  
 
East Timor 
East Timor is a disputed territory on the island of Timor in the Malay 
Archipelago. It was formerly a Portugese colony until 1975.  
 
Eastbourne 
Eastbourne is an old English settlement which only became a town in 1883. 
Today it is a popular seaside resort. 
 
Easter Island 
Easter Island is an island in the south Pacific ocean belonging to Chile. 
 
Eastern Roumelia 
Eastern Roumelia is an area of Bulgaria south of the Balkan mountains. It 
was part of the Turkish empire, and in 1878 became an autonomous province 
and then subsequently became part of Bulgaria.  
 
Ecuador 
Ecuador is a republic in South America. It has a total area of 283,560 
km2. 
The climate is tropical along coast becoming cooler inland. 
The terrain is coastal plain (Costa), inter-Andean central highlands 
(Sierra), and flat to rolling eastern jungle (Oriente). 
Natural resources are petroleum, fish, timber. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic. 
The language is Spanish (official); Indian languages, especially Quechua. 
 
Eden 
The River Eden rises in the Pennines and flows 105 km to the Irish Sea at 
Solway Firth. 
 
Edinburgh 
Edinburgh is the capital of Scotland. 
 
Edmonton 
Edmonton is the capital of Alberta. 
 
Effingham 
Effingham is an old town in Surrey. It was prominent in Elizabethan times 
as the home of the Howards of Effingham.  
 
Egham 
Egham is an historic town in Surrey on the River Thames and next to the 
fields of Runnymede.  
 
Egypt 
Egypt is a republic in north east Africa. It has a total area of 
1,001,450 km2. 
The climate is desert; hot, dry summers with moderate winters. 
The terrain is vast desert plateau interrupted by Nile valley and delta. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, 
manganese, limestone, gypsum, talc, asbestos, lead, zinc. 
The religion is 94% Muslim (mostly Sunni), 6% Coptic Christian and other. 
The language is Arabic (official); English and French widely understood 
by educated classes.  
 
Eire 
Eire is the Gaelic name for the Republic of Ireland.  
 
El Salvador 
El Salvador is a republic in Central America. It has a total area of 
21,040 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (May to October); dry season 
(November to April). 
The terrain is mostly mountains with narrow coastal belt and central 
plateau. 
Natural resources are hydropower and geothermal power, crude oil. 
The religion is about 97% Roman Catholic, with activity by Protestant 
groups throughout the country 
The language is Spanish, Nahua (among some Indians). 
 
Elba 
Elba is an island 10 km west of Italy which exports iron ore. 
 
Elbe 
The elbe is one of the principal rivers in Germany. 
 
Elbert 
Elbert is a mountain in Colorado. It is the highest peak of the Rocky 
Mountains at 4401m. 
 
Elbruz 
The Elbruz is the highest mountain in Europe, standing 5642 meters. It is 
in the Caucasus, Georgia. 
 
Elgin 
Elgin is a royal borough in Scotland. Elgin is a town in Illinois, USA 
where electrical equipment is manufactured.  
 
Ellice Island 
Ellice Island was a former British colony, it is now called Kiribati. 
 
Ellice Islands 
Ellice Islands is the former name of Tuvalu.  
 
Ellis Island 
Ellis Island is an island off the shore of New Jersey, USA. 
 
Elveden 
Elveden is a small village in Suffolk. Elveden was home to Admiral Keppel 
who died here in 1786.  
 
Ely 
Ely is a town in Cambridgeshire. It was originally on an island in the 
River Ouse, but the Fens were drained in the 17th century. 
 
Emilia-Romagna 
Emilia-Romagna is a region of northern and central Italy including much 
of the Po Valley. 
 
Emsworth 
Emsworth is a port on Chichester harbour in Hampshire.  
 
England 
England is a country in west Europe. It is the largest division of the 
united kingdom.  
 
English Channel 
The English Channel is a stretch of water between England and France. 
 
Entebbe 
Entebbe is a town in Uganda. Scene of a famous hijacking. 
 
Ephesus 
Ephesus was an ancient Greek seaport in Asia Minor. 
 
Epidaurus 
Epidaurus was an ancient Greek city and port on the east coast of 
Argolis.  
 
Epping Forest 
Epping Forest is a forest in Essex. It is 6000 acres today, down from the 
60000 acres of the 18th century. It was purchased for the public in 1882. 
 
Equatorial Guinea 
Equatorial Guinea is a republic in west central Africa. It has a total 
area of 28,050 km2. 
The climate is tropical; always hot, humid. 
The terrain is coastal plains rise to interior hills; islands are 
volcanic. 
Natural resources are timber, crude oil, small unexploited deposits of 
gold, manganese, uranium. 
The religion is natives all nominally Christian and predominantly Roman 
Catholic; some pagan practices retained. 
The language is Spanish (official), pidgin English, Fang, Bubi, Ibo. 
 
Erebus 
Erebus is a volcano in Antartica. It stands 4023 metres high. 
 
Eridu 
Eridu was an ancient city of Mesopotamia. 
 
Erie 
Lake Erie is the fourth largest of the Great Lakes of North America.  
 
Eritrea 
Eritrea is a province in north Ethiopia. Eritrea has been at war for 
independence for many years. 
 
Esher 
Esher is a residential town on the River Mole in Surrey. It was the site 
of a KGB "dead-letter-box" during the 1970's.  
 
Essen 
Essen is a city in Germany. 
 
Essex 
Essex is a county in south east England.  
 
Estonia 
Estonia is a country in east Europe. Physicaly, Estonia is comprised of 
lakes and marshes in partly forested plains. The language is Estonian. 
Religion is mainly Lutheran. 
 
Ethiopia 
Ethiopia is a country in north east Africa. It has a total area of 
1,221,900 km2. 
The climate is tropical monsoon with wide topographic-induced variation; 
prone to extended droughts. 
The terrain is high plateau with central mountain range divided by Great 
Rift Valley. 
Natural resources are small reserves of gold, platinum, copper, potash. 
The religion is 40-45% Muslim, 35-40% Ethiopian Orthodox, 15-20% animist, 
5% other. 
The language is  Amharic (official), Tigrinya, Orominga, Arabic, English 
(major foreign language taught in schools). 
 
Etna 
Etna is a volcano in north east Sicily. It erupted in 1971 and 1979.  
 
Euboea 
Euboea is a mountainous island off the east coast of Greece in the Aegean 
Sea.  
 
Euclid 
Euclid is a manufacturing town in Ohio, USA.  
 
Euphrates 
The Euphrates is a river in south west Asia. It rises in the Armenian 
uplands and joined by the Tigris enters the Persian Gulf as the Shatt-al 
Arab.  
 
Eure 
Eure is an agricultural department of Normandy, France. 
 
Europe 
Europe is a continent west of the ural mountains and east of the 
atlantic.  
 
Everest 
Everest is the earth's highest mountain.  
 
Ewell 
Ewell is a town in Surrey, which has now been all-but swallowed into a 
suburb of greater London.  
 
Exe 
The River Exe rises on Exmoor in north devon and flows 87 km to the 
English Channel at Exeter.  
 
Exeter 
Exeter is a city in Devon. It is the administrative capital of Devon and 
host to a livestock market.  
 
Exmoor 
Exmoor is a heather moor in Devon.  
 
Extremadura 
Extremadura is a region in west Spain.  
 
Eye 
Eye is a town in Suffolk. 
 
Eyre 
Lake Eyre is Australia's largest lake.  
 
Falkland Islands 
The Falkland Islands are an island group in the south Atlantic. They 
comprise a total area of 12,170 km2. 
The climate is cold marine; strong westerly winds, cloudy, humid; rain 
occurs on more than half of days in year; occasional snow all year, 
except in January and February, but does not accumulate. 
The terrain is rocky, hilly, mountainous with some boggy, undulating 
plains. 
Natural resources are fish and wildlife. 
The religion is primarily Anglican, Roman Catholic, and United Free 
Church; Evangelist Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Lutheran, Seventh-Day 
Adventist. 
The language is English  
 
Falmouth 
Falmouth is a seaport in Cornwall.  
 
False Bay 
False Bay is an inlet on the East side of the Cape Of Good Hope 
peninsular in South Africa. 
 
Far east 
The far east is that part of Asia east of India.  
 
Farnborough 
Farnborough is a town in Hampshire, home to the RAF.  
 
Farnham 
Farnham is a town in Surrey noted for its Georgian houses and other fine 
architecture, even the fast-food restaurant is in-keeping with the 
general appearance. 
 
Faroe Islands 
The Faroe Islands are 320 km north-west of the Shetland Islands in the 
north sea. They have a total area of 1,400 km2 
The climate is mild winters, cool summers; usually overcast; foggy, 
windy. 
The terrain is rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast. 
Natural resources are fish. 
The religion is Evangelical Lutheran. 
The language is Faroese (derived from Old Norse), Danish.  
 
Fatsa 
Fatsa is a small market town on the Black Sea in north Turkey. It is a 
very traditional Muslim town.  
 
Felbrigg 
Felbrigg is a village 3 km south of Cromer in Norfolk.  
 
Felixstowe 
Felixstowe is a seaport and seaside resort in Suffolk. It was the site of 
a Roman fort, and in the 16th century a castle was built to defend the 
port.  
 
Fens 
The Fens are a marsh in Cambridgeshire. 
 
Fermanagh 
Fermanagh is a county in southern Northern Ireland. 
 
Ferro 
Ferro is the most southern of the Canary Islands. 
 
Fes 
Fes is a city and former capital of Morocco. It is located in a valley 
north of the Great Atlas mountains, 160 km east of Rabat.  
 
Fez 
Fez is a city in Morocco 160km east of Rabat. It is one of the sacred 
cities in Islam.  
 
Fife 
Fife is a region of Scotland. 
 
Fiji 
Fiji is a group of 322 islands in the south west Pacific. They have a 
total area of 18,270 km2. 
The climate is tropical marine; only slight seasonal temperature 
variation. 
The terrain is mostly mountains of volcanic origin. 
Natural resources are timber, fish, gold, copper; offshore oil potential. 
The religion is Fijians are mainly Christian, Indians are Hindu with a 
Muslim minority. 
The language is English (official); Fijian; Hindustani. 
 
Filey 
Filey is a seaside resort town in North Yorkshire. It is 8km south east 
of Scarborough. 
 
Finland 
Finland is a republic in Scandinavia. It has a total area of 337,030 km2. 
The climate is cold temperate; potentially subarctic, but comparatively 
mild because of moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current, 
Baltic Sea, and more than 60,000 lakes. 
The terrain is mostly low, flat to rolling plains interspersed with lakes 
and low hills. 
Natural resources are timber, copper, zinc, iron ore, silver. 
The religion is 97% Evangelical Lutheran, 1.2% Eastern Orthodox, 1.8% 
other 
The language is 93.5% Finnish, 6.3% Swedish (both official); small Lapp- 
and Russian-speaking minorities.  
 
Finnmark 
Finnmark is the most Northern county of Norway. It is inhabited by Lapps. 
It has large copper deposits. 
 
Firenze 
Firenze is the Italian name for Florence. 
 
Fishbourne 
Fishbourne is a town 2 km west of Chichester. It is the site of a Roman 
Palace. 
 
Flanders 
Flanders is a region between the river Scheldt and the coast on the 
France and Belgium border. It is divided into east and west Flanders. 
 
Fleet 
Fleet is a town in Hampshire. 
 
Florence 
Florence is the capital of Tuscany. 
 
Flores 
Flores is the most westerly island of the Azores. 
 
Florida 
Florida is the most south east state of the USA.  
 
Folkestone 
Folkestone is a popular seaside resort and cross-channel seaport in Kent. 
 
Fordwich 
Fordwich is a village on the River Stour 4 km east of Canterbury in Kent. 
 
Formentera 
Formentera is one of the Balearic Islands.  
 
Fort Sumter 
Fort Sumter is a fort in Charleston harbour, South Carolina, USA. The 
first shots of the American Civil War were fired at Fort Sumter.  
 
Fort-de-France 
Fort-de-France is the capital of Martinique.  
 
Forth 
The Forth River rises in South Perth on the north east side of Loch 
Lomond and flows 106 km to the Firth of Forth.  
 
Fortunate Islands 
The Fortunate Islands is a former name for the Canary Islands.  
 
Foulness 
Foulness is the largest island in the Thames estuary in Essex.  
 
Framlingham 
Framlingham is a market town in Suffolk.  
 
Franche-Comte 
Franche-Comte is a region in eastern France.  
 
Frankfurt 
see "Frankfurt-am-Main" 
 
Frankfurt-am-Main 
Frankfurt-am-Main is a city in Hesse, Germany.  
 
Freetown 
Freetown is the capital city of Sierra Leone. It is a port on the 
Atlantic coast. 
 
French Guiana 
French Guiana is a country on the north coast of South America. It has a 
total area of 91,000 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; little seasonal temperature 
variation. 
The terrain is low-lying coastal plains rising to hills and small 
mountains. 
Natural resources are bauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered), cinnabar, 
kaolin, fish. 
The religion is predominantly Roman Catholic. 
The language is  French.  
 
French Polynesia 
French Polynesia is a territory in the south Pacific. It has a total area 
of 3,941 km2. 
The climate is tropical, but moderate. 
The terrain is mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs. 
Natural resources are timber, fish, cobalt. 
The religion is mainly Christian; 55% Protestant, 32% Roman Catholic. 
The language is French (official), Tahitian. 
 
French Sudan 
French Sudan is a former name of Mali.  
 
Frensham 
Frensham is a beauty spot in Surrey. It is comprised of a common more 
than 1 square miles in area with prehistoric bowl barrows and two large 
lakes.  
 
Freshwater 
Freshwater is a town on the Isle of Wight.  
 
Fressingfield 
Fressingfield is a village in Suffolk.  
 
Friendly Islands 
Friendly Islands is another name for Tonga. 
 
Friesland 
Friesland is a maritime province of the Netherlands.  
 
Frimley 
Frimley is a prehistoric and Roman village in Surrey. 
 
Frinton 
Frinton is a seaside resort town in Essex.  
 
Friuli-Venezia Giulia 
Friuli-Venezia Giulia is an autonomous agricultural and wine-growing 
region of north east Italy.  
 
Frome 
Frome is a market town in the Mendips, Somerset, England on the River 
Frome. The River Frome is a river which rises in north Dorset and flows 
to Poole. 
 
Froyle 
Froyle is a village in Hampshire. 
 
Fuji 
see "Fujiyama" 
 
Fujiyama 
Mount Fuji (Fujiyama) is a volcanno in Japan and also Japan's highest 
peak. 
 
Fukien 
Fukien is a province of China.  
 
Fukuoka 
Fukuoka is an industrial town and port on the north west coast of Kyushu 
island, Japan. 
 
Fukushima 
Fukushima is the chief town of Joban. 
 
Fuzhou 
Fuzhou is an industrial port and capital of Fujian province in south east 
China.  
 
Gabon 
Gabon is a country in central Africa. It has a total area of 267,670 km2. 
The climate is tropical; always hot, humid. 
The terrain is narrow coastal plain; hilly interior; savanna in east and 
south. 
Natural resources are crude oil, manganese, uranium, gold, timber, iron 
ore. 
The religion is 55-75% Christian, less than 1% Muslim, remainder animist. 
The language is  French (official), Fang, Myene, Bateke, 
Bapounou/Eschira, Bandjabi. 
 
Gaborone 
Gaborone is the capital city of Botswana. It became the capital in 1965.  
 
Galicia 
Galicia is a mountainous, fertile autonomous region of north west Spain.  
 
Galilee 
The Sea of Galilee is an alternative name for Lake Tiberias in northern 
Israel. 
 
Gallego 
The Gallego is a river in north east Spain. It rises in the Pyrenees and 
flows south to the river Ebro at Zaragoza. It is 176km long. 
 
Gallipoli 
Gallipoli is a port in European Turkey. 
 
Galway 
Galway is a coastal town in the Republic Of Ireland. It is a university 
town and also features marble quarries and a fishing industry.  
 
Gambia 
Gambia is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 11,300 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler, 
dry season (November to May). 
The terrain is flood plain of the Gambia River flanked by some low hills. 
Natural resources are fish. 
The religion is 90% Muslim, 9% Christian, 1% indigenous beliefs. 
The language is  English (official); Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, other 
indigenous vernaculars.  
 
Ganges 
The ganges is a sacred river in India.  
 
Gansu 
Gansu is a province of north west China.  
 
Garonne 
The Garonne is a river in south west France. It rises at mount Maladetta 
in the Pyrenees and flows via Toulouse to the Gironde estuary. It is 
720km long. 
 
Garut 
Garut is a mountain resort town in West Java, Indonesia.  
 
Gascony 
Gascony is an ancient province in south west France.  
 
Gateshead 
Gateshead is a town on the river Tyne opposite Newcastle in Tyne And 
Wear, England. 
 
Gatwick 
Gatwick is England's second most important airport. It was opened in 1958 
on te London to Brighton route in Surrey. When it was opened it was the 
most modern airport in Europe.  
 
Gaza 
Gaza is the capital city of the Gaza Strip. 
 
Gaza Strip 
The Gaza Strip is an area of Israel. It has a total area of 380km2. 
The climate is temperate, mild winters, dry and warm to hot summers. 
The terrain is flat to rolling, sand and dune covered coastal plain. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is 99% Muslim (predominantly Sunni), 0.7% Christian, 0.3% 
Jewish. 
The language is Arabic, Israeli settlers speak Hebrew, English widely 
understood.  
 
Gdansk 
Gdansk (Danzig) is a port in Poland.  
 
Geneva 
Geneva is the capital of Switzerland. 
 
Genoa 
Genoa (Genova) is a town and seaport in north west Italy. 
 
Genova 
Genova is the Italian name for Genoa. 
 
Georgetown 
Georgetown is a port and the capital city of Guyana.  
 
Georgia 
Georgia is a state in the south USA. 
Georgia is a country in east Europe. 
 
Germany 
Germany is a country in central Europe. The climate is temperate; cloudy, 
cold winters with frequent rain and snow; 
cool, wet summers. 
The terrain is lowlands in north, uplands in center, Bavarian Alps in 
south. The east is mostly flat plain with hills. 
Natural resources are lignite, potash, uranium, copper, natural gas, 
salt, nickel, iron ore, coal, potash, timber. 
The religion is 47% Protestant, 7% Roman Catholic, 46% unaffiliated or 
other. 
The language is  German  
 
Gettysburg 
Gettysburg is a site in Pennsylvania of a decisive battle in the American 
Civil War.  
 
Ghana 
Ghana is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 238,540 km2 
The climate is tropical; warm and comparatively dry along southeast 
coast; hot and humid in southwest; hot and dry in north. 
The terrain is mostly low plains with dissected plateau in south-central 
area. 
Natural resources are gold, timber, industrial diamonds, bauxite, 
manganese, fish, rubber. 
The religion is 38% indigenous beliefs, 30% Muslim, 24% Christian, 8% 
other. 
The language is  English (official); African languages include Akan, 
Moshi-Dagomba, Ewe, and Ga.  
 
Ghats 
The ghats are a mountain range in south India.  
 
Ghent 
Ghent is a city and port in East Flanders, north west Belgium.  
 
Gibraltar 
Gibraltar is an island south of Spain and north of Morocco. It has a 
total area of 6.5 km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean with mild winters and warm summers. 
The terrain is a narrow coastal lowland borders. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is 75% Roman Catholic, 8% Church of England, 2.25% Jewish. 
The language is  English and Spanish are primary languages; Italian, 
Portuguese, and Russian also spoken; English used in the schools and for 
official purposes.  
 
Gilbert Island 
Gilbert Island was a former British colony, it is now called Tuvalu.  
 
Givors 
Givors is a town on the river Rhone in France, 16km south of Lyons. It is 
a manufacturing town producing glass. 
 
Giza 
Giza is a suburb of Cairo, Egypt. It is the site of the great pyramids 
and the Spinx. 
 
Glandford 
Glandford is a village in Norfolk.  
 
Glasgow 
Glasgow is a city and the administrative headquarters of Strathclyde, 
Scotland. 
 
Glastonbury 
Glastonbury is a town in Somerset.  
 
Glossop 
Glossop is a town in Derbyshire, England at the foot of the Pennines. 
 
Gloucestershire 
Gloucestershire is a county in south west England.  
 
Glynde 
Glynde is a village in Sussex, England. 
 
Goa 
Goa is a union territory of India.  
 
Gobi 
The gobi is a desert partly in China and Mongolia.  
 
Godthaab 
Godthaab is the capital of Greenland. 
 
Golan Heights 
The Golan Heights is a plateau on the Syrian border with Israel. It was 
annexed by Israel in 1981.  
 
Goose Bay 
Goose Bay is a town in Labrador, Canada on the Churchill river. It 
features an international airport. 
 
Gorky 
Gorky is a city on the river Oka and river Volga in the Soviet Union. It 
is a university city and was named after Maxim Gorky who was born there. 
 
Goteborg 
Goteborg is a port and industrial city in west Sweden.  
 
Gotland 
Gotland is an island in the Baltic belonging to Sweden, and with many old 
buildings. It's revenue is primarily derived from tourism.  
 
Gough island 
Gough Island is an island in the atlantic ocean.  
 
Graciosa 
Graciosa is an island of the Azores.  
 
Grain Coast 
Grain Coast is a former name of Liberia 
 
Grampian 
Grampian is a region of Scotland. 
 
Gran Chaco 
The Gran Chaco is a large lowland plain in northern Argentina, western 
Paraguay and south-east Bolivia. 
 
Granada 
Granada is a city in the Sierra Nevada in Andalucia, southern Spain.  
 
Grand Canal 
The Grand Canal is the world's longest canal. It runs 1600km from 
Hangzhou to Tianjin, China. 
 
Grand Canyon 
The grand canyon is a vast gorge in Arizona.  
 
Grantchester 
Grantchester is a village 3 km south of Cambridge in Cambridgeshire.  
 
Gravesend 
Gravesend is a sea port in Kent, England on the south bank of the river 
Thames. 
 
Graz 
Graz is a city in Austria. It stands on the river Mur at the foothills of 
the Alps. 
 
Great altai 
The great altai are a mountain range in Mongolia and Siberia. 
 
Great Australian Bight 
The Great Australian Bight is a broad bay in south Australia notorious 
for its storms.  
 
Great Barrier Reef 
The Great Barrier Reef is a chain of coral reefs and islands 2000km long 
off the east coast of Queensland, Australia. 
 
Great Bear Lake 
The Great Bear Lake is a lake in the Arctic Circle in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada.  
 
Great Bookham 
Great Bookham is a village in Surrey, the site of Polesden Lacey a 
Regency house built in 1824. 
 
Great Divide 
The Great Divide is a mountain range extending 3700km from Cape York 
Peninsular, Queensland to Victoria in Australia. 
 
Great Lakes 
The Great Lakes are a series of five freshwater lakes along the USA and 
Canada border.  
 
Great Ouse 
The Great Ouse River rises in Northamptonshire near Brackley and flows 
251 km to The Wash.  
 
Great Rift Valley 
The Great Rift Valley is the longest split in the earth's surface 
extending 8000km from the Dead Sea to Mozambique. 
 
Great Slave Lake 
Great Slave Lake is a lake in the Northwest Territories, Canada.  
 
Great Yarmouth 
Great Yarmouth is a town in Norfolk where the River Bure, River Waveney 
and River Yare converge to flow out into the North Sea. It was granted 
its charter in 1208 by King John.  
 
Greece 
Greece is a country and island group in south east Europe. It has a total 
area of 131,940 km2. 
The climate is temperate; mild, wet winters; hot, dry summers. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with ranges extending into sea as 
peninsulas or chains of islands. 
Natural resources are bauxite, lignite, magnesite, crude oil, marble. 
The religion is 98% Greek Orthodox, 1.3% Muslim, 0.7% other. 
The language is  Greek (official); English and French widely understood.  
 
Greenham Common 
Greenham Common is an area of common land near to Newbury, England. It 
was the site of a USA missile base and peace protests during the 1980s.  
 
Greenland 
Greenland is the world's largest island. It is in the north Atlantic 
ocean. It has a total area of 2,175,600 km2. 
The climate is arctic to subarctic; cool summers, cold winters. 
The terrain is flat to gradually sloping icecap covers all but a narrow, 
mountainous, barren, rocky coast. 
Natural resources are zinc, lead, iron ore, coal, molybdenum, cryolite, 
uranium, fish. 
The religion is Evangelical Lutheran. 
The language is Eskimo dialects, Danish.  
 
Greenwich Village 
Greenwich Village is a region of lower Manhattan, popular with artists. 
 
Grenada 
Grenada is an island in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 340 km2. 
The climate is tropical; tempered by northeast trade winds. 
The terrain is volcanic in origin with central mountains. 
Natural resources are timber, tropical fruit, deepwater harbors. 
The religion is largely Roman Catholic; Anglican; other Protestant sects. 
The language is  English (official); some French patois.  
 
Grenadines 
The Grenadines are a chain of 600 small islands in the Caribbean. 
 
Gris-Nez 
Gris-Nez is a city in north east France on the coast, and the nearest 
point to Dover in England.  
 
Gruzia 
Gruzia is the Russian name for the country of Georgia.  
 
Guadalajara 
Guadalajara is an industrial city and capital of Jalisco state in western 
Mexico. 
 
Guadalcanal 
Guadalcanal is the largest of the Solomon islands.  
 
Guadeloupe 
Guadeloupe is an island in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 1,780 
km2. 
The climate is subtropical tempered by trade winds; relatively high 
humidity. 
The terrain is Basse-Terre is volcanic in origin with interior mountains; 
Grand-Terre is low limestone formation. 
Natural resources are cultivable land, beaches, and climate that foster 
tourism. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic, 5% Hindu and pagan African. 
The language is French, creole patois. 
 
Guam 
Guam is the largest of the Mariana islands. It has a total area of 541 
km2. 
The climate is tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by 
northeast trade winds; dry season from January to June, rainy season from 
July to December; little seasonal temperature variation. 
The terrain is volcanic origin, surrounded by coral reefs; relatively 
flat coraline limestone plateau (source of most fresh water) with steep 
coastal cliffs and narrow coastal plains in north, low-rising hills in 
center, mountains in south. 
Natural resources are fishing (largely undeveloped), tourism (especially 
from Japan). 
The religion is 98% Roman Catholic, 2% other. 
The language is  English and Chamorro, most residents bilingual; Japanese 
also widely spoken.  
 
Guangdong 
Guangdong is a province in south China. 
 
Guangxi 
Guangxi is a region in south China. 
 
Guangzhou 
Guangzhou is the capital of Guangdong.  
 
Guatemala 
Guatemala is a republic in Central America. It has a total area of 
108,890 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid in lowlands; cooler in highlands. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with narrow coastal plains and rolling 
limestone plateau (Peten). 
Natural resources are crude oil, nickel, rare woods, fish, chicle. 
The religion is predominantly Roman Catholic; also Protestant, 
traditional Mayan. 
The language is  Spanish, but over 40% of the population speaks an Indian 
language as a primary tongue (18 Indian dialects, including Quiche, 
Cakchiquel, Kekchi). 
 
Guatemala City 
Guatemala City is the capital of Guatemala. 
 
Guayaquil 
Guayaquil is a city and the chief port of Ecuador.  
 
Gubla 
Gubla was the Babylonian name for Byblos. 
 
Guernsey 
Guernsey is the second largest Channel island. It has a total area of 194 
km2. 
The climate is temperate with mild winters and cool summers; about 50% of 
days are overcast. 
The terrain is mostly level with low hills in southwest. 
Natural resources are cropland. 
The religion is Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist, 
Congregational, Methodist. 
The language is English, French; Norman-French dialect spoken in country 
districts.  
 
Guiana 
Guiana is the north east part of South America which includes French 
Guiana, Guyana and Suriname. 
 
Guildford 
Guildford is the capital city of Surrey county. It is an old town on the 
banks of the River Wey.  
 
Guinea 
Guinea is a republic in west Africa. It has a total area of 245,860 km2. 
The climate is generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season (June 
to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to May) with 
northeasterly harmattan winds. 
The terrain is generally flat coastal plain, hilly to mountainous 
interior. 
Natural resources are bauxite, iron ore, diamonds, gold, uranium, 
hydropower, fish. 
The religion is 85% Muslim, 5% indigenous beliefs, 1.5% Christian. 
The language is  French (official); each tribe has its own language.  
 
Guinea Bissau 
Guinea Bissau is a republic in west Africa. It has a total area of 36,120 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; generally hot and humid; monsoon-type rainy 
season (June to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December 
to May) with northeasterly harmattan winds. 
The terrain is mostly low coastal plain rising to savanna in east. 
Natural resources are unexploited deposits of petroleum, bauxite, 
phosphates; fish, timber. 
The religion is 65% indigenous beliefs, 30% Muslim, 5% Christian. 
The language is  Portuguese (official); Criolo and numerous African 
languages.  
 
Guiyang 
Guiyang (formerly Kweiyang) is the capital of Guizhou province, south 
China.  
 
Guizhou 
Guizhou (formerly Kweichow) is a province in south China. 
 
Gujarat 
Gujarat is a state in west India. 
 
Gulf of Finland 
The Gulf of Finland is the eastern arm of the Baltic Sea, separating 
Finland from Estonia.  
 
Guyana 
Guyana is a republic in South America. It has a total area of 214,970 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid, moderated by northeast trade winds; 
two rainy seasons (May to mid-August, mid-November to mid-January). 
The terrain is mostly rolling highlands; low coastal plain; savanna in 
south. 
Natural resources are bauxite, gold, diamonds, hardwood timber, shrimp, 
fish. 
The religion is 57% Christian, 33% Hindu, 9% Muslim, 1% other. 
The language is English, Amerindian dialects.  
 
Gwent 
Gwent is a county in south Wales. 
 
Gwynedd 
Gwynedd is a county in north west Wales.  
 
Haarlem 
Haarlem is an industrial town in the west Netherlands.  
 
Haifa 
Haifa is a port in north east Israel. 
 
Hainan 
Hainan is an island in the south China sea. 
 
Haiphong 
Haiphong is an industrial port in north Vietnam.  
 
Haiti 
Haiti is a republic in the west of the island of Hispaniola. It has a 
total area of 27,750 km2. 
The climate is tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade 
winds. 
The terrain is mostly rough and mountainous. 
Natural resources are bauxite. 
The religion is 75-80% Roman Catholic (of which an overwhelming majority 
also practice Voodoo), 10% Protestant 
The language is  French (official) spoken by only 10% of population; all 
speak Creole.  
 
Halesworth 
Halesworth is a small market town in Suffolk. 
 
Halicarnassus 
Halicarnassus was an ancient city in Asia Minor (now Bodrum) where the 
tomb of Mausolus was one of the Seven Wonders of the World.  
 
Halifax 
Halifax is the capital of Nova Scotia, and east Canada's main port. 
 
Halstead 
Halstead is a small town in the Colne valley in Essex.  
 
Hamburg 
Hamburg is a city and the largest inland port in Europe. It is located on 
the Elbe in Germany.  
 
Hamilton 
Hamilton is the capital of Bermuda. 
 
Hampshire 
Hampshire is a county in south England. 
 
Hangchow 
Hangchow is a former name of Hangshou.  
 
Hangzhou 
Hangzhou is a port and the capital of Zhejiang province, China. 
 
Hanoi 
Hanoi is the capital of Vietnam.  
 
Hanover 
Hanover is an industrial city and the capital of Lower Saxony in Germany. 
 
Happisburgh 
Happisburgh (pronounced Haysborough) is a coastal village in Norfolk. 
 
Harare 
Harare is the capital of Zimbabwe.  
 
Harbin 
Harbin is a port on the Songhua river in north east China. It is the 
capital of Heilongjiang province.  
 
Harleston 
Harleston is a town in Norfolk on the River Waveney.  
 
Harlow 
Harlow is a new town in Essex. It was designed and built to relieve 
London of some residents and industry.  
 
Harrisburg 
Harrisburg is the capital city of Pennsylvania, USA. It stands on the 
Susquehanna River.  
 
Hartford 
Hartford is the capital of Connecticut. 
 
Hartz 
see "Harz" 
 
Harwell 
Harwell is a village in Berkshire. It is the site of the Atomic Energy 
Research Establishment.  
 
Harwich 
Harwich is a seaport in Essex. It is located where the River Stour and 
the River Orwell meet to flow out into the North Sea.  
 
Haryana 
Haryana is a state in north west India. 
 
Harz 
The Harz (Hartz) is the most northerly mountain range of Germany 
extending roughly 100km from south-east to north-west and about 32 km 
wide embracing the towns of Klausthal, Goslar and Blankenburg. The 
highest peak is Brocken.  
 
Haslemere 
Haslemere is a small town set in the Weydown common in Surrey.  
 
Hastings 
Hastings is a sea town in Sussex. William the conqueror invaded at 
hastings in 1066 where he defeated King harold 2nd.  
 
Havana 
Havana is the capital of Cuba.  
 
Havant 
Havant is a town in Hampshire. Originally a market town, it is now an 
over spill of Portsmouth. 
 
Haverhill 
Haverhill (pronounced Hayverill) is a town in Suffolk.  
 
Hawaii 
Hawaii is a group of islands in the Pacific and a state of the USA. 
 
Heacham 
Heacham is a village in Norfolk.  
 
Heathfield 
Heathfield is a village, now expanding into a town, in Sussex. It was an 
important centre of the Sussex iron industry in previous times.  
 
Hebei 
Hebei is a province in north China. 
 
Hebrides 
The Hebrides is a group of 500 islands west of Scotland.  
 
Hefei 
Hefei is the capital of Anhui province, China.  
 
Heilongjiang 
Heilongjiang is a province in north east China. 
 
Heilungkiang 
Heilungkiang is a province of China.  
 
Hellshire 
Hellshire is a hilly region in south-east Jamaica extending to the coast. 
The Hellshire Hills are a very beautiful part of the island sporting 
magnificient cactii and are the home to a variety of wildlife including 
Iguana.  
 
Helsinki 
Helsinki is the capital of Finland. 
 
Hemel Hempstead 
Hemel Hempstead is a new town in Hertfordshire. It was founded in 1947 on 
the south slopes of the Chiltern Hills. 
 
Henan 
Henan is a province in east China.  
 
Hengrave 
Hengrave is a village in Suffolk. It is noted for its tiny church and 
magnificent mansion.  
 
Herat 
Herat is the capital of Herat province, Afghanistan, on the north bank of 
the Hari Rud. 
 
Hercegovina 
Hercegovina is an area of Yugolsavia. 
 
Hereford and Worcester 
Hereford and Worcester is a county in west central England. 
 
Herringfleet 
Herringfleet is a village in north east Suffolk.  
 
Hertfordshire 
Hertfordshire is a county in south east England.  
 
Hesse 
Hesse is an administrative region in Germany. 
 
Heydon 
Heydon is a village in Norfolk. 
 
Highland Region 
The Highland Region is an administrative region of Scotland.  
 
Himachal Pradesh 
Himachal Pradesh is a state in north west India.  
 
Himalayas 
The Himalayas are a mountain range in central Asia. 
 
Hindhead 
Hindhead is a twon in Surrey on the old Portsmouth to London road (now 
the A3). 
 
Hindu Kush 
Hindu Kush is a mountain range in central Asia. 
 
Hiroshima 
Hiroshima is an industrial city and port on the south coast of Honshu, 
Japan. It was destroyed on the 6th of August 1945 when it was the target 
of the first atomic bomb. 
 
Ho Chi Minh City 
Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) is the chief port and an industrial 
city in south Vietnam. Saigon was the capital of South Vietnam from 1954 
until 1976. 
 
Hobart 
Hobart is the capital of Tasmania.  
 
Hohhot 
Hohhot (formerly Huhehot) is the capital of Inner Mongolia. 
 
Hokkaido 
Hokkaido is the most northern of the main Japanese islands. 
 
Hollesley 
Hollesley (pronounced Hozely) is a small village in Suffolk.  
 
Hollywood 
Hollywood is a suburb of Los Angeles, California. It is the centre of the 
USA film industry.  
 
Holt 
Holt is a town in Norfolk.  
 
Homs 
Homs is the capital of Homs district in western Syria.  
 
Honan 
Honan is a province of China. 
 
Honduras 
Honduras is a republic in Central America. It has a total area of 112,090 
km2. 
The climate is subtropical in lowlands, temperate in mountains. 
The terrain is mostly mountains in interior, narrow coastal plains. 
Natural resources are timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore, 
antimony, coal, fish. 
The religion is about 97% Roman Catholic; small Protestant minority. 
The language is Spanish, Indian dialects. 
 
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong is an island off the coast of China. It has a total area of 
1,040 km2/ 
The climate is tropical monsoon; cool and humid in winter, hot and rainy 
from spring through summer, warm and sunny in autumn. 
The terrain is hilly to mountainous with steep slopes; lowlands in north. 
Natural resources are outstanding deepwater harbor, feldspar. 
The religion is 90% eclectic mixture of local religions, 10% Christian. 
The language is Chinese (Cantonese), English. 
 
Honiara 
Honiara is the capital of the Solomon islands.  
 
Honington 
Honington is a town in Suffolk. 
 
Honolulu 
Honolulu is the capital of Hawaii on the south coast of Oahu. 
 
Honshu 
Honshu is the principal Japanese island.  
 
Hopa 
Hopa is a sea port on the Black Sea in east Turkey. 
 
Hopei 
Hopei is a province of China. 
 
Horsforth 
Horsforth is a town in west Yorkshire.  
 
Horsham 
Horsham is a town in West Sussex on the river Arun. 
Horsham is a town in Victoria, Australia on the river Wimmera.  
 
Horta 
Horta is a town on Fayal Island in the Azores. It features an excellent 
harbour and is a base for transatlantic flights.  
 
Houston 
Houston is a port in Texas linked by a canal to the Gulf of Mexico. 
 
Huang He 
Huang He (formerly Hwang-ho) is the chinese name for the Yellow River.  
 
Hubei 
Hubei is a province in central China. 
 
Hudson Bay 
Hudson Bay is an inland sea of north east Canada linked with the Atlantic 
by the Hudson Strait and with the Arctic by the Foxe Channel. 
 
Huhehot 
see "Hohhot" 
 
Hull 
Hull is a city and port on the River Humber in Humberside, England. 
 
Humberside 
Humberside is a county in north east England. 
 
Hunan 
Hunan is a province of China. 
 
Hungary 
Hungary is a republic in central Europe. It has a total area of 93,030 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers. 
The terrain is mostly flat to rolling plains. 
Natural resources are bauxite, coal, natural gas, fertile soils. 
The religion is 67.5% Roman Catholic, 20.0% Calvinist, 5.0% Lutheran, 
7.5% atheist and other. 
The language is 98.2% Hungarian, 1.8% other.  
 
Hungerford 
Hungerford is an old town in Berkshire on the Roman road to Bath. It was 
the scene of a massacre commited by Michael Ryan in the early 1990s. 
 
Hupei 
Hupei is the former name of Hebei province, China.  
 
Huron 
Huron is the second largest of the Great Lakes. 
 
Hwang-ho 
see "Huang_He" 
 
Hyderabad 
Hyderabad is the capital of Andhra Pradesh. 
 
Hythe 
Hythe is a town in Kent. It was formerly a sea port, it is now a seaside 
resort.  
 
Ibadan 
Ibadan is the capital of Oyo state, Nigeria.  
 
Ibiza 
Ibiza is one of the Balearic Islands. 
 
Iceland 
Iceland is a republic island in the north Atlantic. It has a total area 
of 103,000 km2. 
The climate is temperate; moderated by North Atlantic Current; mild, 
windy winters; damp, cool summers. 
The terrain is mostly plateau interspersed with mountain peaks, 
icefields; coast deeply indented by bays and fiords. 
Natural resources are fish, hydroelectric and geothermal power, 
diatomite. 
The religion is 95% Evangelical Lutheran, 3% other Protestant and Roman 
Catholic, 2% no affiliation. 
The language is Icelandic. 
 
Idaho 
Idaho is a state in north west America. 
 
Ightham 
Ightham is a village in Kent. 
 
Ijsselmeer 
Ijsselmeer is a lake in the Netherlands. It was formed in 1932 after the 
Zuider Zee was cut off by a dyke from the North Sea. 
 
Ile-de-France 
Ile-de-France is a region of northern France. 
 
Ilfracombe 
Ilfracombe is a seaside resort in Devon.  
 
Illinois 
Illinois is a midwest state of USA. 
 
Ilminster 
Ilminster is a town in Somerset, England. Its chief industries concern 
the manufacture of concrete and radio valves.  
 
Immingham 
Immingham is a port on the Humber in Humberside, England. It has a deep-
sea oil terminal. 
 
Imphal 
Imphal is the capital of Manipur state in India.  
 
Inchon 
Inchon is the chief port of Seoul, South Korea. 
 
India 
India is a country in south Asia. It has a total area of 3,287,590 km2. 
The climate varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in north. 
The terrain is upland plain in south, flat to rolling plain along the 
Ganges, deserts in west, Himalayas in north. 
Natural resources are coal, iron ore, manganese, mica, bauxite, titanium 
ore, comite, natural gas, diamonds, crude oil, limestone. 
The religion is 82.6% Hindu, 11.4% Muslim, 2.4% Christian, 2.0% Sikh, 
0.7% Buddhist, 0.5% Jains, 0.4% other. 
The language is Hindi, English, and 14 other official languages: Bengali, 
Telgu, 
Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, Gujarati, Malayalam, Kannada, Oriya, Punjabi, 
Assamese, 
Kashmiri, Sindhi, and Sanskrit; 24 languages spoken by a million or more 
people and numerous other languages and dialects. 
Hindi is the national language and primary tongue of 30% of the people; 
English is the most important language for national, political, and 
commercial communication; Hindustani is spoken widely throughout northern 
India.  
 
Indian ocean 
The Indian ocean is the sea separating Africa from Australia. It has a 
total area of 73,600,000 km2 
 
Indiana 
Indiana is a state in midwest USA.  
 
Indonesia 
Indonesia is a group of 3000 islands in south east Asia. They have a 
total area of 1,919,440 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands. 
The terrain is mostly coastal lowlands; larger islands have interior 
mountains. 
Natural resources are crude oil, tin, natural gas, nickel, timber, 
bauxite, copper, fertile soils, coal, gold, silver. 
The religion is 88% Muslim, 6% Protestant, 3% Roman Catholic, 2% Hindu, 
1% other. 
The language is Bahasa Indonesia (modified form of Malay; official); 
English and Dutch leading foreign languages; local dialects, the most 
widely spoken of which is Javanese.  
 
Indus 
The Indus is a river rising in Tibet and flowing 3059 km to the Arabian 
sea.  
 
Inn 
The River Inn is a European river which flows through Switzerland, the 
tyrol, Austria and Bavaria for 512km to the River Danube at Passau.  
 
Inner Mongolia 
Inner Mongolia is an autonomous region of China.  
 
Innsbruck 
Innsbruck is the capital of Tirol state in western Austria. It is a 
tourist and winter sports centre. It hosted the 1964 and 1976 Winter 
Olympics.  
 
Inverness 
Inverness is a town in the Highland Region, Scotland. 
 
Iona 
Iona is an island in the Hebrides.  
 
Iowa 
Iowa is a state in midwest USA. 
 
Iowa City 
Iowa City is a city in Iowa state, USA. It was once the state capital.  
 
Ipoh 
Ipoh is the capital of Perak state in north west Malaysia.  
 
Ipswich 
Ipswich is the county town of East Suffolk. 
 
Iran 
Iran is a country in south west Asia. It has a total area of 1,648,000 
km2. 
The climate is mostly arid or semiarid, subtropical along Caspian coast. 
The terrain is rugged, mountainous rim; high, central basin with deserts, 
mountains; small, discontinuous plains along both coasts. 
Natural resources are petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, 
iron ore, lead, manganese, zinc, sulphur. 
The religion is 95% Shia Muslim, 4% Sunni Muslim, 2% Zoroastrian, Jewish, 
Christian, and Bahai. 
The language is 58% Persian and Persian dialects, 26% Turkic and Turkic 
dialects, 9% Kurdish, 2% Luri, 1% Baloch, 1% Arabic, 1% Turkish, 2% 
other. 
 
Iraq 
Iraq is a country in south west Asia. It has a total area of 434,920 km2. 
The climate is desert; mild to cool winters with dry, hot, cloudless 
summers. 
The terrain is mostly broad plains; reedy marshes in southeast; mountains 
along borders with Iran and Turkey 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, phosphates, sulphur. 
The religion is 97% Muslim (60-65% Shia, 32-37% Sunni), 3% Christian or 
other. 
The language is Arabic (official), Kurdish (official in Kurdish regions), 
Assyrian, Armenian.  
 
Irazu 
Irazu is an active volcano in Costa Rica. 
 
Ireland 
Ireland is a country and island west of Wales. It has a total area of 
70,280 km2. 
The climate is temperate maritime; modified by North Atlantic Current; 
mild winters, cool summers; consistently humid; overcast about half the 
time. 
The terrain is mostly level to rolling interior plain surrounded by 
rugged hills and low mountains; sea cliffs on west coast 
Natural resources are zinc, lead, natural gas, crude oil, barite, copper, 
gypsum, limestone, dolomite, peat, silver. 
The religion is 94% Roman Catholic, 4% Anglican, 2% other. 
The language is Irish (Gaelic) and English; English is the language 
generally used, with Gaelic spoken in a few areas, mostly along the 
western seaboard. 
 
Irian Jaya 
Irian Jaya is the western portion of the island of New Guinea.  
 
Irkutsk 
Irkutsk is a city in southern Russia. It was founded in 1652. 
 
Irrawaddy 
The Irrawaddy is the main river in Burma. It flows 2090 km from the Mali 
and N'mai rivers to the Bay of Bengal. 
 
Islamabad 
Islamabad is the capital of Pakistan. 
 
Islay Island 
Islay Island is one of the Inner Hebrides. It has an area of 609 square 
km and is chiefly used for dairy farming and distilling.  
 
Isle of Man 
The Isle of Man is an island in north west Britain. 
 
Isle of Wight 
The Isle of Wight is an island south of Hampshire.  
 
Islington 
Islington is a borough of London. It was previously called Isendone and 
Iseldone by the Romans. 
 
Israel 
Israel is a Jewish country in south west Asia. It has a total area of 
20,770 km2. 
The climate is temperate; hot and dry in desert areas. 
The terrain is Negev desert in the south; low coastal plain; central 
mountains; Jordan Rift Valley 
Natural resources are copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand, 
sulphur, asphalt, manganese, small amounts of natural gas and crude oil. 
The religion is 83% Judaism, 13.1% Islam (mostly Sunni Muslim), 2.3% 
Christian, 1.6% Druze 
The language is Hebrew (official); Arabic used officially for Arab 
minority; English most commonly used foreign language.  
 
Istanbul 
Istanbul is a major city in Turkey. 
 
Italy 
Italy is a country in south Europe. It has a total area of 301,230 km2. 
The climate is predominantly Mediterranean; Alpine in far north; hot, dry 
in south. 
The terrain is mostly rugged and mountainous; some plains, coastal 
lowlands. 
Natural resources are mercury, potash, marble, sulphur, dwindling natural 
gas and crude oil reserves, fish, coal 
The religion is almost 100% nominally Roman Catholic. 
The language is Italian; parts of Trentino-Alto Adige region are 
predominantly German speaking; significant French-speaking minority in 
Valle d'Aosta region; Slovene-speaking minority in the Trieste-Gorizia 
area.  
 
Ithake 
Ithake is an Ionian island in the Aegean sea. 
 
Ivory coast 
The ivory coast is a republic in west Africa. It has a total area of 
322,460 km2. 
The climate is tropical along coast, semiarid in far north; three 
seasons-warm and dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to May), hot 
and wet (June to October). 
The terrain is mostly flat to undulating plains; mountains in northwest. 
Natural resources are crude oil, diamonds, manganese, iron ore, cobalt, 
bauxite, copper 
The religion is 63% indigenous, 25% Muslim, 12% Christian. 
The language is French (official), over 60 native dialects; Dioula most 
widely spoken  
 
Ixworth 
Ixworth is a village in Suffolk.  
 
Izmir 
Izmir (formerly Smyrna) is a port and naval base in Turkey. It is the 
headquarters of NATO's south east command.  
 
Jackson 
Jackson is the capital city of Mississippi state in the USA. Jackson is a 
town in Michigan, USA on the Grand River. 
 
Jaipur 
Jaipur is the capital of Rajasthan. 
 
Jamaica 
Jaimaica is an island in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 10,990 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; temperate interior. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with narrow, discontinuous coastal plain. 
Natural resources are bauxite, gypsum, limestone. 
The religion is predominantly Protestant (including Anglican and 
Baptist), some Roman Catholic. The majority of the population also 
believe in a form of magic known as Obeah. 
The language is English, Patois. 
 
Jammu 
Jammu is a state in north India 
 
Jan Mayen 
Jan Mayen Island is an island in the Artci Ocean. It has a total area of 
373 km2. 
The climate is arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog. 
The terrain is volcanic island, partly covered by glaciers; Beerenberg is 
the highest peak, with an elevation of 2,277 meters.  
 
Japan 
Japan is a country in east Asia. It is comprised of several islands. It 
has a total area of 377,835 km2. 
The climate is varies from tropical in south to cool temperate in north. 
The terrain is mostly rugged and mountainous. 
Natural resources are negligible mineral resources, fish. 
The religion is most Japanese observe both Shinto and Buddhist rites; 
about 16% belong to other faiths, including 0.8% Christian. 
The language is Japanese. 
 
Java 
Java is an Indonesian island. 
 
Jedda 
see "Jiddah" 
 
Jericho 
Jericho is an Israeli-administered town in Jordan north of the Dead Sea.  
 
Jersey 
Jersey is the largest of the Channel islands. It has a total area of 117 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; mild winters and cool summers. 
The terrain is gently rolling plain with low, rugged hills along north 
coast. 
Natural resources are agricultural land. 
The religion is Anglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Congregational New 
Church, Methodist, Presbyterian 
The language is English and French (official), with the Norman-French 
dialect spoken in country districts.  
 
Jerusalem 
Jerusalem is an ancient city in Palestine. In 1948 it was divided bwteen 
Jordan, and the newly formed Israel. 
 
Jiangsu 
Jiangsu is a province on the coast of east China. 
 
Jiangxi 
Jiangxi is a province in south east China.  
 
Jiddah 
Jiddah (Jedda) is a port in Hejaz, Saudi Arabia on the east shore of the 
Red Sea. 
 
Jilin 
Jilin is a province in north east China.  
 
Jimma 
Jimma is a coffee producing town in Ethiopia. 
 
Jinan 
Jinan is the capital of Shandong province, China. 
 
Jinja 
Jinja is a manufacturing town on the shore of Lake Victoria in Uganda.  
 
Jinsha Jiang 
The Jinsha Jiang is a river in China. It rises in south west China and 
flows to Yibin where it forms the Chang Jiang. ce. It is hos  
 
Joban 
Joban is a district of north east Honshu in Japan.  
 
Johannesburg 
Johannesburg is the largest city in South Africa. It is situated on the 
Witwatersrand river in Transvaal. 6  \  
 
Johnstown 
Johnstown is an industrial town in Pennsylvania on the Conemaugh River. 
 
Jones Town 
Jones Town is an old ghetto region of Kingston, Jamaica. It is troubled 
by shootings involving gangs of youths from neighbouring regions. 
 
Jordan 
Jordan is a kingdom in south west Asia. It has a total area of 91,880 
km2. 
The climate is mostly arid desert; rainy season in west (November to 
April). 
The terrain is mostly desert plateau in east, highland area in west; 
Great Rift Valley separates East and West Banks of the Jordan River. 
Natural resources are phosphates, potash, shale oil. 
The religion is 92% Sunni Muslim, 8% Christian. 
The language is Arabic (official); English widely understood among upper 
and middle classes. 
 
Judaea 
Judaea was a division of Palestine during Roman times.  
 
Jugoslavia 
see "Yugolsavia" 
 
Juneau 
Juneau is the capital city of Alaska. 
 
Jura 
Jura is a mountain range in Switzerland and France. Jura is a French 
department on the border of France and Switzerland.  
 
Jura Mountains 
The Jura mountains run along the French Swiss border. 
 
Jutland 
Jutland is a peninsular of northern Europe. It was the scene of a  
naval battle during the first world war.   
 
K2 
K2 (Chogori) is the second highest mountain in the Karakoram range on  
the border between China and Pakistan. It stands 8858 meters. It was  
first climbed in 1954 by an Italian expedition.  
 
Kabul 
Kabul is the capital of Afghanistan.  
 
Kairouan 
Kairouan is a Muslim holy city in Tunisia and a noted centre of carpet  
manufacturing.  
 
Kalahari desert 
The Kalahari desert is a semi-desert forming most of Botswana.  
 
Kalgan 
Kalgan is a city in north east China, now known as Zhangjiakou. 
 
Kalimantan 
Kalimantan is a province of Indonesia on the island of Borneo.  
 
Kamchatka 
Kamchatka is a mountainous peninsular separating the Bering Sea and the 
Sea of Okhotsk. 
 
Kampala 
Kampala is the capital of Uganda. 
 
Kampuchea 
Kampuchea is a former name of Cambodia. 
 
Kandy 
Kandy is a city in central Sri Lanka. 
 
Kangchenjunga 
Kangchenjunga is a 8598 meter high mountain in the Himalayas on the Nepal 
and Sikkim border. It was first climbed in 1955 by a British expedition.  
 
Kano 
Kano is the capital of Kano state in northern Nigeria.  
 
Kanpur 
Kanpur is the capital of Kanpur district, Uttar Pradesh, India.   
 
Kansas 
Kansas is a state in central USA.   
 
Kansu 
Kansu is a province of China. 
 
Kaohsiung 
Kaohsiung is a sea port on the south west coast of Taiwan. It has 
aluminium works and also oil refineries.  
 
Kaposvar 
Kaposvar is a town in south west Hungary on the Kapos River.  
 
Kara Sea 
The Kara Sea is the part of the Arctic Ocean east of Novaya Zemlya. 
Between July and September it provides navigation to the Siberian ports.  
 
Kara-Kum 
The Kara-Kum is a sand desert in Turkmen east of the Caspian Sea. 
 
Karachi 
Karachi is the largest city and chief seaport in Pakistan.  
 
Karakoram 
Karakoram is a mountain range in central Asia.  
 
Karakorum Range 
The Karakorum Range is the part of the Himalayas between Kashmir and 
China. 
 
Karelia 
Karelia is an autonomous republic in Russia.  
 
Karen 
Karen is a white suburb of Nairobi in Kenya.  
 
Karnataka 
Karnataka (formerly Mysore) is a state in south west India.   
 
Karroo 
Karroo is a high plateau in the West Cape province of South Africa. It is 
irrigated by the Verwoerd dam on the Orange River.  
 
Kashmir 
Kashmir is an area of Asia divided between Pakistan and India.  
 
Kathmandu 
see "Katmandu" 
 
Katmandu 
Katmandu is the capital of Nepal. 
 
Katowice 
Katowice is an industrial city in Upper Silesia, southern Poland. 
 
Katyn Forest 
The Katyn Forest is a forest near Smolensk. 
 
Kawasaki 
Kawasaki is an industrial city on Honshu island, Japan. 
 
Kazakhstan 
Kazakhstan is a country in central Asia.  
 
Kazan 
Kazan is the capital of Tatar. It is a city on the banks of the river 
Volga.  
 
Keeling Islands 
see "Cocos_Islands" 
 
Kent 
Kent is a county in south east England. 
 
Kenton 
Kenton is a large village in Devon. 
 
Kentucky 
Kentucky is a state in south central USA. 
 
Kenya 
Kenya is a country in east Africa. It has a total area of 582,650 km2. 
The climate is varies from tropical along coast to arid in interior. 
The terrain is low plains rise to central highlands bisected by Great 
Rift Valley; fertile plateau in west 
Natural resources are gold, limestone, diotomite, salt barytes, 
magnesite, feldspar, sapphires, fluorspar, garnets, wildlife 
The religion is 38% Protestant, 28% Roman Catholic, 26% indigenous 
beliefs, 6% Muslim 
The language is English and Swahili (official); numerous indigenous 
languages.  
 
Kerala 
Kerala is a state of south west India.  
 
Kerkira 
Kerkira is the Greek name for Corfu.  
 
Kermadec Islands 
The Kermadec Islands are a group of volcanic islands in the Pacific Ocean 
960km north east of New Zealand. They were annexed by New Zealand in 
1887.  
 
Kerman 
Kerman is a mountanous and desert region of south east Iran. It includes 
a large copper mining and refining plant.  
 
Kerry 
Kerry is a county in Munster province, Ireland. 
 
Ketama 
Ketama is the principal hash growing town in Morocco. Visitors are 
advised to stay away as the area is guarded by armed drug gangs. 
 
Kettering 
Kettering is a market town in Northamptonshire, England.  
 
Kharkov 
Kharkov is the capital of Kharkov region in the Ukraine.  
 
Khartoum 
Khartoum is the capital of Sudan. 
 
Khuzestan 
Khuzestan is a province in west Iran. It borders on Iraq. It is a large 
petroleum centre. 
 
Khyber Pass 
The Khyber Pass is a narrow gap in the Hindu Kush mountains separating 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.  
 
Kiangsi 
Kiangsi is a province of China. 
 
Kiangsu 
Kiangsu is a province of China. 
 
Kiev 
Kiev is the capital of Ukraine. 
 
Kigali 
Kigali is the capital of Rwanda.  
 
Kildare 
Kildare is a county of Leinster province, Ireland.  
 
Kilimanjaro 
Kilimanjaro is an inactive volcano in Tanzania. It is the site of the 
only glacier on the equator.  
 
Kilkenny 
Kilkenny is a county of Leinster province, Ireland. 
 
King 
A King is a male sovereign ruler of an independent state. 
 
King's Lynn 
King's Lynn (formerly Bishop's Lynn) is a seaport in Norfolk. 
 
Kingsbridge 
Kingsbridge is a town serving the South Hams farming district of 
Cornwall.  
 
Kingston 
Kingston is the capital of Jamaica. 
 
Kingston-upon-Thames 
Kingston-upon-Thames is an area of suburban greater London. 
 
Kingstown 
Kingstown is the capital of St. Vincent.  
 
Kinshasa 
Kinshasa (formerly Leopoldville) is the capital of Zaire. 
 
Kirghizia 
Kirghizia is a country in central Asia. 
 
Kiribati 
Kiribati is a country in the central Pacific. It has a total area of 717 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; marine, hot and humid, moderated by trade winds. 
The terrain is mostly low-lying coral atolls surrounded by extensive 
reefs. 
Natural resources are phosphate (production discontinued in 1979). 
The religion is 48% Roman Catholic, 45% Protestant (Congregational), some 
Seventh-Day Adventist and Baha'i 
The language is English (official), Gilbertese. 
 
Kirin 
Kirin is the former name for Jilin, a province in China.  
 
Kirov 
Kirov is a town in Russia on the Vyatka river.  
 
Kishinev 
Kishinev is the capital of Moldavia.  
 
Kismayu 
Kismayu is a port in in Somalia.  
 
Kitakyushu 
Kitakyushu is an industrial city and port on north Kyushu in Japan. 
 
Klondike 
The Klondike is a former gold-mining area in the Yukon, Canada. 
 
Kobe 
Kobe is a deep water port in south Honshu, Japan. 
 
Korea 
Korea is two countries in east Asia, North Korea and South Korea. 
 
Kosciusko 
Kosciusko is the highest mountain in Australia. It is 2229 meters high, 
and is located in New South Wales.  
 
Kosovo 
Kosovo is an autonomous region of Serbia. 
 
Kourou 
The Kourou is a river in French Guiana. 
 
Kowloon 
Kowloon is a peninsular on the coast of China.  
 
Krakow 
Krakow is a city in Poland on the Vistula.  
 
Krems 
Krems is a market town in Austria on the river Danube. It was founded in 
the 10th century as an imperial fortress.  
 
Kristiansand 
Kristiansand is a seaport on the west coast of Norway.  
 
Krondstadt 
Krondstadt is the German name for the Romanian town of Brasov.  
 
Kuala Lumpur 
Kuala Lumpur is the capital of Malaysia.  
 
Kuibyshev 
Kuibyshev (Kuybyshev) is the capital of Kuibyshev region, Russia. It is 
aport at the junctions of the river Volga and river Samara. 
 
Kunming 
Kunming is the capital of Yunnan province, China. 
 
Kurdistan 
Kurdistan is a region in south west Asia. 
 
Kuril Islands 
The Kuril Islands are a chain of 50 small islands stretching from the 
north east of Hokkaido, Japan.  
 
Kurils 
see "Kuril_Islands" 
 
Kuwait 
Kuwait is a country in south west Asia. It has a total area of 17,820 
km2. 
The climate is dry desert; intensely hot summers; short, cool winters. 
The terrain is flat to slightly undulating desert plain. 
Natural resources are petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas. 
The religion is 85% Muslim (30% Shia, 45% Sunni, 10% other), 15% 
Christian, Hindu, Parsi, and other. 
The language is Arabic (official); English widely spoken. 
 
Kuwait City 
Kuwait City is the capital of Kuwait. 
 
Kwangtung 
Kwangtung is a province of China. 
 
Kweichow 
Kweichow is a province of China.  
 
Kyoto 
Kyoto was the capital of Japan from 794 until 1868. It is a University 
town on Honshu island linked by a canal with Biwa Lake.  
 
Kyushu 
Kyushu is the most southernly of the Japanese islands.  
 
La Paz 
La Paz is a city in Bolivia. It was founded by the Spanish in 1548. 
 
La Plata 
La Plata is a seaport city in Argentina.  
 
La Rioja 
La Rioja is a region of northen Spain.  
 
Labrador 
Labrador is the mainland part of the province of Newfoundland.  
 
Ladoga 
Lake Ladoga is the largest lake in Europe. It is located north east of 
Leningrad. 
 
Ladysmith 
Ladysmith is a town in Natal. It was besieged by Boers from November the 
2 nd 1899 until February 28th 1900 when it was relieved by Sir R. H. 
Buller. 
 
Lagash 
Lagash was a Sumerian city north of Shatra in Iraq. It was important from 
3000BC to 2700BC. It was discovered in 1877 by Earnest de Saroec. 
 
Lagos 
Lagos is the former capital of Nigeria. 
 
Lahore 
Lahore is the capital of Punjab.  
 
Lake Chad 
Lake Chad is a lake on the north east boundary of Nigeria.  
 
Lake Geneva 
Lake Geneva is the largest of the central European lakes. It is between 
Switzerland and France. 
 
Lake Magadi 
Lake Magadi is a soda lake in the Rift Valley below Nairobi in Kenya. It 
is one of the hottest places in Kenya. It is a popular spot for bird 
watching. 
 
Lake Michigan 
Lake Michigan is a lake in north central USA. 
 
Lake Owens 
Lake Owens is a lake in southern California on the east flank of Sierra 
Nevada. 
 
Lake Superior 
Lake Superior is the largest of the Great Lakes, and the second largest 
lake in the world.  
 
Lake Victoria 
Lake Victoria is the largest lake in Africa at 69400 km2. It lies between 
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania and is a source of the Nile. 
 
Lakshadweep 
Lakshadweep is a group of coral islands in the Indian Ocean 320km off the 
Malabar coast. 10 of the islands are inhabited. 
 
Lampedusa 
Lampedusa is the largest of the Pelagi islands. It is between Malta and 
the Tunisian coast. 
 
Lancashire 
Lancashire is a county in north west England. 
 
Lancing 
Lancing is a village on the south coast of West Sussex, England; 3km east 
of Worthing.  
 
Langport 
Langport is an industrial town in Somerset. 
 
Languedoc-Roussillon 
Languedoc-Roussillon is a region in southern France.  
 
Lansing 
Lansing is the capital of Michigan. 
 
Lanzhou 
Lanzhou is the capital of Gansu province, China.  
 
Laois 
Laois is a county in Leinster province, Ireland.  
 
Laos 
Laos is a country in south east Asia. It has a total area of  236,800 
km2. 
The climate is tropical monsoon; rainy season (May to November); dry 
season (December to April). 
The terrain is mostly rugged mountains; some plains and plateaus. 
Natural resources are timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold, gemstones. 
The religion is 85% Buddhist, 15% animist and other. 
The language is Lao (official), French, and English. 
 
Lapland 
Lapland is a region of Europe within the arctic circle. 
 
Laptev Sea 
The Laptev Sea is an inlet of the Arctic Ocean between Severnaya Zemlya 
and New Siberian Island.  
 
Larissa 
In mythology, Larissa was a city in thessaly where Achilles was 
reportedly born.  
 
Las Palmas 
Las Palmas is a tourist resort on the north east coast of Gran Canaria. 
 
Latium 
Latium was an ancient region of central Italy on the Tyrrhenian Sea, 
extending between Etruria and Campania, and inhabited by the Latins, 
Volsci and Aequi. 
 
Latvia 
Latvia is a country in east Europe. The climate is mild. Physicaly the 
country is wooded lowland, marshes and lakes. The language is Latvian. 
The religion is mainly Lutheran Protestant with some Roman Catholic.  
 
Lausanne 
Lausanne is a resort and the capital of Vaud canton in western 
Switzerland. 
 
Laxfield 
Laxfield is a village in Suffolk. 
 
Lazio 
Lazio is a region of west central Italy. It was called Latium by the 
Romans.  
 
Le Havre 
Le Havre is an industrial port in Normandy, north west France on the 
River Seine. 
 
Le Mans 
Le Mans is the capital town of Sarthe department in north west France. It 
is host to a world famous motor race. 
 
Leadenhall 
Leadenhall is a meat and poultry market in London. It is so named because 
it was originaly held in a lead roofed hall at the corner of Gracechurch 
street.  
 
Leatherhead 
Leatherhead is an old town in Surrey. 
 
Lebanon 
Lebanon is a country in west Asia. It has a total area of 10,400 km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean; mild to cool, wet winters with hot, dry 
summers. 
The terrain is narrow coastal plain; Al Biqa (Bekaa Valley) separates 
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon Mountains 
Natural resources are limestone, iron ore, salt; water-surplus state in a 
water-deficit region. 
The religion is 75% Islam, 25% Christian, NEGL% Judaism; 17 legally 
recognized sects-4 Orthodox Christian (Armenian Orthodox, Greek  
Orthodox, Nestorean, Syriac Orthodox), 7 Uniate Christian (Armenian 
Catholic, Caldean, Greek Catholic, Maronite, Protestant, Roman  
Catholic, Syrian Catholic), 5 Islam (Alawite or Nusayri, Druze, 
Ismailite, Shia, Sunni), and 1 Jewish. 
The language is Arabic and French (both official); Armenian, English  
 
Ledbury 
Ledbury is a market town in Herefordshire, England at the west foor of 
the Malvern hills. 
 
Leeds 
Leeds is a dismal industrial city in west Yorkshire, England. It stands 
on the River Aire.  
 
Leek 
Leek is a market town in Staffordshire, England 18 km north east of 
Stoke-On-Trent. 
 
Leeuwarden 
Leeuwarden is the capital city of Friesland province in the Netherlamds. 
It is noted for its cattle market. 
 
Leicester 
Leicester is an industrial city on the River Soar in England. 
 
Leicestershire 
Leicestershire is a county in central England.  
 
Leigh 
Leigh is a market town in Greater Manchester, England.  
 
Leinster 
Leinster is a south eastern province of the Republic of Ireland.  
 
Leipzig 
Leipzig is the capital city of Leipzig county in eastern Germany. It is 
145km south west of Berlin. 
 
Leitrim 
Leitrim is a county in Connacht province in the Republic of Ireland 
bounded to the north west by Donegal Bay. 
 
Lemnos 
In mythology, Lemnos was a small island at the mouth of the Hellespont. 
Hephaestus landed on Lemnos when Zeus threw him out of heaven, and set up 
a forge on the island.  
 
Lena 
The Lena is one of the great navigatable Siberian rivers. It is 4480km 
long.  
 
Leningrad 
Leningrad was the name given to the town of Petrograd in 1924 which 
stands at the head of the Gulf of Finland in Russia.  
 
Leon 
Leon is a city in west Nicaragua. It was founded in 1524, and was the 
capital of Nicaragua until 1855.  
 
Leopoldville 
Leopoldville was a former name of Kinshasa city in Zaire. 
 
Leopolis 
Leopolis was a suburb founded by Pope Leo 4th in the 9th century. It was 
later renamed Leonine City and became a part of the city of Rome.  
 
Leptis Magna 
Leptis Magna was a city in Libya, 120km east of Tripoli. It was founded 
by the Phoenicians, conquered by Carthage and finally by the Romans in 
47BC.  
 
Lesbos 
Lesbos is the former name of the Greek island of Lesvos.  
 
Lesotho 
Lesotho is a country within South Africa. It has a total area of 30,350 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; cool to cold, dry winters; hot, wet summers. 
The terrain is mostly highland with some plateaus, hills, and mountains. 
Natural resources are some diamonds and other minerals, water, 
agricultural and grazing land 
The religion is 80% Christian, rest indigenous beliefs. 
The language is Sesotho (southern Sotho) and English (official); also 
Zulu and Xhosa  
 
Lewes 
Lewes is the county town of East Sussex. Lewes came into prominence 
shortly after William The Conqueror invaded and erected a fort here.  
 
Lexington 
Lexington is a city in Massachusetts, USA. On the 19th April 1775 it was 
the scene of a battle during the American War of Independance. 
 
Lhasa 
Lhasa is the capital of the autonomous region of Tibet, in China. 
 
Liaoning 
Liaoning is a province of north eastern China.  
 
Liberia 
Liberia is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 111,370 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; dry winters with hot days and cool 
to cold nights; wet, cloudy summers with frequent heavy showers. 
The terrain is mostly flat to rolling coastal plains rising to rolling 
plateau and low mountains in northeast 
Natural resources are iron ore, timber, diamonds, gold. 
The religion is 70% traditional, 20% Muslim, 10% Christian. 
The language is English (official); more than 20 local languages of the 
Niger-Congo language group; English used by about 20%.  
 
Liberty City 
Liberty City is a mainly black slum area of Miami. It is generally 
considered a no-go area for whites, however much of its reputation is 
built upon racial prejudice rather than facts. It is the drug centre of 
Miami. 
 
Libreville 
Libreville is the capital city of Gabon. It stands on the estuary of the 
River Gabon. Libreville was founded in 1849 as a refuge for slaves freed 
by the French.  
 
Libya 
Libya is an arab country in north Africa. It has a total area of 
1,759,540 km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean along coast; dry, extreme desert interior. 
The terrain is mostly barren, flat to undulating plains, plateaus, 
depressions. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, gypsum. 
The religion is 97% Sunni Muslim. 
The language is Arabic; Italian and English are widely understood in 
major cities.  
 
Lidice 
Lidice is a mining village in Czechoslovakia which was destroyed by the 
Nazis in 1942 as a reprisal for the assassination of Heydrich.  
 
Liechtenstein 
Liechtenstein is a country in west Europe. It has a total area of 160 
km2. 
The climate is continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow or 
rain; cool to moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers. 
The terrain is mostly mountainous (Alps) with Rhine Valley in western 
third. 
Natural resources are hydroelectric potential. 
The religion is 82.7% Roman Catholic, 7.1% Protestant, 10.2% other. 
The language is German (official), Alemannic dialect. 
 
Liege 
Liege is an industrial city and capital of Liege province in Belgium. It 
stands south east of Brussels on the Meuse River.  
 
Lille 
Lille is an industrial city, and the capital of Nord-Pas-de-Calais in 
France. 
 
Lilongwe 
Lilongwe is the capital of Malawi.  
 
Lima 
Lima is the capital of Peru.  
 
Limerick 
Limerick is the county town of Limerick in the Republic of Ireland. It 
was founded in the 12th century, and today is the main port in western 
Ireland.  
 
Limpsfield 
Limpsfield is a village in Surrey with a Norman church. 
 
Lincolnshire 
Lincolnshire is a county in central England.  
 
Linlithgowshire 
Linlithgowshire is a former name of West Lothian in Scotland. 
 
Linz 
Linz is a port on the river Danube in Austria. It features iron and steel 
works.  
 
Lipa 
Lipa is a town in the Philippines. It is a sugar, cocoa and maize 
processing centre.  
 
Lippe 
The Lippe is a 176 km long tributary river of the Rhine.  
 
Lisboa 
Lisboa is the Portugese name for Lisbon.  
 
Lisbon 
Lisbon is the capital of Portugal.  
 
Lithuania 
Lithuania is a country in east Europe.  
 
Littlehampton 
Littlehampton is a quiet seaside resort town in Sussex. 
 
Liverpool 
Liverpool is a city and seaport in Merseyside, north west England. It is 
Europe's main Atlantic port. 
 
Livingston 
Livingston is a new town in West Lothian, Scotland. It was founded in 
1962 as an industrial town. 
 
Livingstone 
Livingstone is a town in Zambia on the Zambesi River. It was once the 
capital of Zambia.  
 
Livonia 
Livonia was a region of Europe which comprised much of what is today 
Latvia and Estonia.  
 
Ljubljana 
Ljubljana is the capital of Slovenia. 
 
Llanberis 
Llanberis is a mountain pass between Snowdon and Clyder Fawr in Gwynedd, 
Wales. 
 
Llanstephan 
Llanstephan is a village in Dyfed, Wales at the mouth of the River Towy. 
The Normans built a castle here. 
 
Loanda 
Loanda is a former name of Luanda, in Angola. 
 
Loch Lomond 
Loch Lomond is Scotland's largest lake. It is 70 km2. 
 
Loch Ness 
Loch Ness is a lake in the Highland region of Scotland reportedly the 
home of a sea monster.  
 
Locomotion 
Locomotion is the idea of movement from one place to another. 
 
Loddon 
Loddon is a small town in Norfolk.  
 
Lodz 
Lodz is an industrial town in central Poland 120km south west of Warsaw.  
 
Loire 
The Loire is the longest river in France. It rises in Cevennes and flows 
1050 km to the Bay of Biscay at St. Nazaire. 
 
Lombardy 
Lombardy is a major industrial area in north Italy. 
 
Lome 
Lome is the capital of Togo.  
 
Lomza 
Lomza is a town in Bialystok, Poland on the Narew River.  
 
London 
London is the capital of England. 
 
Londonderry 
Londonderry is a county in Northern Ireland.  
 
Londrina 
Londrina is a city in Parana, Brazil. It is an industrial and commercial 
centre handling coffee, maize, cotton and livestock. 
 
Long Beach 
Long Beach is a Pacific coast resort and industrial suburb of Los 
Angeles.  
 
Long Island 
Long Island is an island off the coast of Connecticut and New York in the 
USA.  
 
Longford 
Longford is a county of Leinster province, Republic of Ireland. 
 
Looe 
Looe is a fishing village and tourist resort in Cornwall. 
 
Lorient 
Lorient is a sea port in Morbihan department, north west France.  
 
Lorraine 
Lorraine is a region of France. 
 
Los Alamos 
Los Alamos is a town in New Mexico, USA. It was the site for the testing 
of the first atomic bomb.  
 
Los Angeles 
Los Angeles is a city in south California, USA. It is the busiest port in 
California. It is one of the world's largest urban areas. 
 
Lostwithiel 
Lostwithiel is a market town in Cornwall, England on the River Fowey 
south east of Bodmin.  
 
Lot 
Lot is a department in south west France. Primary industry includes 
livestock, wine, cereals, coal and iron.  
 
Lothian 
Lothian is a region of Scotland.  
 
Lough Neagh 
Lough Neagh is a lake in Northern Ireland. It is the largest lake in the 
Britsh Isles at 396 km2. 
 
Loughrea 
Loughrea is a market town in Galway, Ireland. 
 
Louisiana 
Louisiana is a state in south USA.  
 
Louisville 
Louisville is a city on the Ohio river in Kentucky, USA. It is a 
university city and host to the world's largest tobacco market.  
 
Lourdes 
Lourdes is a town in south west France. It has a christian shrine to St. 
Bernadette which has a reputation for miraculous cures.  
 
Louth 
Louth is a county of Leinster in the Republic of Ireland. 
 
Lower Hutt 
Lower Hutt is an industrial city in New Zealand.  
 
Lower Saxony 
Lower Saxony is an area of North West Germany.  
 
Lowestoft 
Lowestoft is a seaside town in Suffolk. 
 
Luanda 
Luanda is the capital city of Angola. It was founded in 1575 and became a 
Portugese administrative centre and later an outlet for slaves being 
transported to Brazil. It is still a seaport today.  
 
Lucea 
Lucea is a sea port in north Jamaica. 
 
Lucerne 
Lucerne is the capital of Lucerne canton in Switzerland. Lucerne stands 
on the Reuss River where it flows out of Lake Lucerne. Lucerne grew up 
around the Benedictine monastery established around 750. 
 
Lucknow 
Lucknow is the capital of Uttar Pradesh, India. It is an industrial city 
which during the Indian mutiny against British rule was beseiged for 
several months. 
 
Ludham 
Ludham is a village on the Broads in Norfolk. 
 
Lumbini 
Lumbini is the borthplace of Buddha in the foothills of the Himalayas 
near the Nepalese-Indian border. A shrine and sacred garden were 
established here in 1970 by the Nepalese government. 
 
Lundy Island 
Lundy Island is a small island, 5 km long and 1 km wide, off the north 
Devon coast. 
 
Lusaka 
Lusaka is the capital of Zambia.  
 
Luton 
Luton is a town in Bedfordshire, England in the Chiltern Hills. 
 
Luxembourg 
Luxembourg is a small country in western Europe. It has a total area of 
2,586 km2. 
The climate is modified continental with mild winters and cool summers. 
The terrain is mostly gently rolling uplands with broad, shallow valleys; 
uplands to slightly mountainous in the north; steep slope down to Moselle 
floodplain in the southeast 
Natural resources are iron ore which is no longer exploited. 
The religion is 97% Roman Catholic, 3% Protestant and Jewish. 
The language is Luxembourgish, German, French; many also speak English. 
 
Luxor 
Luxor is a village in Egypt on the East bank of the River Nile near the 
ruins of Thebes.  
 
Luzon 
Luzon is the largest island of the Philippines. 
 
Lydford 
Lydford was once a town in Devon, it is now a village.  
 
Lydia 
Lydia was an ancient kingdom in Anatonia around 6BC.  
 
Lyme Regis 
Lyme Regis is a town in Dorset. It was a busy medieval port. During the 
18th century it became a seaside resort. It is still a good place to look 
for fossils.  
 
Lyndhurst 
Lyndhurst is a town in the New Forest in Hampshire. 
 
Lyons 
Lyons (Lyon) is an industrial city and capital of Rhone department in 
France. It is the third largest city in France and is situated at the 
confluence of the Rhone and Saone rivers. 
 
M'pongo 
M'pongo was a former name for the area now called Gabon.  
 
Macao 
see "Macau" 
 
Macapa 
Macapa is a city at the mouth of the Amazon river in Brazil.  
 
Macau 
Macau is a country in east Asia. It has a total area of 16 km2. 
The climate is subtropical; marine with cool winters, warm summers. 
The terrain is generally flat. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is mainly Buddhist; 17,000 Roman Catholics, of whom about 
half are Chinese 
The language is Portuguese (official); Cantonese is the language of 
commerce.  
 
Macclesfield 
Macclesfield is a town in Cheshire, England at the foot of the Pennines. 
It is 16km south of Stockport. 
 
Macedonia 
Macedonia is a republic of Yugolsavia.  
 
Maceio 
Maceio is a seaport in Brazil.  
 
Mackenzie 
The Mackenzie River flows 1800 km from the Great Slave Lake in the 
Northwest territories of Canada north west to the Atlantic Ocean.  
 
Madagascar 
Madagascar is an island country in the Indian ocean east of Africa. It 
has a total area of 587,040 km2. 
The climate is tropical along coast, temperate inland, arid in south. 
The terrain is narrow coastal plain, high plateau and mountains in 
center. 
Natural resources are graphite, chromite, coal, bauxite, salt, quartz, 
tar sands, semiprecious stones, mica, fish. 
The religion is 52% indigenous beliefs; about 41% Christian, 7% Muslim. 
The language is French and Malagasy (official)  
 
Madeira 
Madeira is a group of islands off the north west coast of Africa. 
 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh is a state in central India. 
 
Madras 
Madras is the capital of Tamil Nadu.  
 
Madrid 
Madrid is the capital of Spain. 
 
Madurai 
Madurai is a city in Tamil Nadu, India. It is the site of the 16th 
century Hindu temple of Sundareswara.  
 
Magadha 
Magadha was a kingom of ancient India.  
 
Magdeburg 
Magdeburg is an industrial city and port on the River Elbe in eastern 
Germany.  
 
Maghreb 
Maghreb is a name for north west Africa.  
 
Maharashta 
Maharashta is a state in west central India.  
 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra is a state in west central India. 
 
Maidenhead 
Maidenhead is a town in Berkshire.  
 
Maidstone 
Maidstone is the county town of Kent. It stands on the River Medway. 
Maidstone came into prominence in the 14th century when it was a centre 
of revolt. 
 
Maine 
Maine is a state in north east USA. 
 
Majorca 
Majorca is the largest of the Balearic Islands. 
 
Makhachkala 
Makhachkala is the capital of Dagestan. 
 
Malabo 
Malabo is the capital of Equatorial Guinea. 
 
Malaga 
Malaga is an industrial seaport and holiday resort in Spain.  
 
Malawi 
Malawi is a country in south east Africa. It has a total area of 118,480 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (November to May); dry season (May 
to November) 
The terrain is narrow elongated plateau with rolling plains, rounded 
hills, some mountains 
Natural resources are limestone; unexploited deposits of uranium, coal, 
and bauxite 
The religion is 55% Protestant, 20% Roman Catholic, 20% Muslim; 
traditional indigenous beliefs are also practiced 
The language is English and Chichewa (official); other languages 
important regionally. 
 
Malaysia 
Malaysia is a country in south east Asia. It has a total area of 329,750 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; annual southwest (April to October) and 
northeast (October to February) monsoons 
The terrain is coastal plains rising to hills and mountains. 
Natural resources are tin, crude oil, timber, copper, iron ore, natural 
gas, bauxite. 
The religion is Peninsular Malaysia - Malays nearly all Muslim, Chinese 
predominantly Buddhists, Indians predominantly Hindu; Sabah - 38% Muslim, 
17% Christian, 45% other; Sarawak - 35% tribal religion, 24% Buddhist and 
Confucianist, 20% Muslim, 16% Christian, 5% other. 
The language is Peninsular Malaysia - Malay (official); English, Chinese 
dialects, Tamil; Sabah - English, Malay, numerous tribal dialects, 
Mandarin and Hakka dialects predominate among Chinese; Sarawak - English, 
Malay, Mandarin, numerous tribal languages. 
 
Maldives 
The Maldives is a 1196 island group country in the Indian ocean. They 
have a total area of 300 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; dry, northeast monsoon (November to 
March); rainy, southwest monsoon (June to August). 
The terrain is flat with elevations only as high as 2.5 meters. 
Natural resources are fish. 
The religion is Sunni Muslim. 
The language is Divehi (dialect of Sinhala; script derived from Arabic); 
English spoken by most government officials. 
 
Maldon 
Maldon is a town in Essex on the River Blackwater.  
 
Male 
Male is the capital of the Maldives.  
 
Mali 
Mali is a country in north west Africa. It has a total area of 1,240,000 
km2. 
The climate is subtropical to arid; hot and dry February to June; rainy, 
humid, and mild June to November; cool and dry November to February. 
The terrain is mostly flat to rolling northern plains covered by sand; 
savanna in south, rugged hills in northeast 
Natural resources are gold, phosphates, kaolin, salt, limestone, uranium; 
bauxite, iron ore, manganese, tin, and copper deposits are known but not 
exploited. 
The religion is 90% Muslim, 9% indigenous beliefs, 1% Christian. 
The language is French (official); Bambara spoken by about 80% of the 
population; numerous African languages  
 
Mallorca 
see "Majorca" 
 
Malmo 
Malmo is an industrial port in south west Sweden. 
 
Malta 
Malta is an island country in the mediterranean. It has a total area of 
320 km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry 
summers. 
The terrain is mostly low, rocky, flat to dissected plains; many coastal 
cliffs. 
Natural resources are limestone, salt. 
The religion is 98% Roman Catholic. 
The language is Maltese and English (official) 
 
Malton 
Malton is a market town in north Yorkshire, England on the River Derwent. 
 
Maluku 
The Maluku are a group on Indonesian islands formerly known as the Spice 
Islands. 
 
Malvinas 
Malvinas is the Argentine name for the Falkland Islands 
 
Mamore 
The Mamore is a river in north Bolivia and Brazil. It rises in the Andes. 
It is 1920km long.  
 
Managua 
Managua is the capital city of Nicaragua. It is on the shore of lake 
Managua. 
 
Manama 
Manama is the capital and a free trade port of Bahrain. 
 
Manaus 
Manaus is the capital of Amazonas in Brazil. It stands on the Rio Negro 
near to its confluence with the Amazon. 
 
Manche 
Manche is a department in north west France. Primary industry is dairy 
farming and cattle.  
 
Manchester 
Manchester is a major city in north west England on the River Irwell 50 
km east of Liverpool. 
 
Manchuria 
Manchuria is the European name for a region of north east China.  
 
Mandalay 
Mandalay is the chief town of Upper Burma. It stands on the River 
Irrawaddy 495 km north of Rangoon.  
 
Manhattan 
Manhattan is an island, 20 km long and 4 km wide lying between the Hudson 
and East rivers and forming a borough of the city of New York in the USA. 
 
Manila 
Manila is the capital of the Philippines. 
 
Manipur 
Manipur is a state in north east India. 
 
Manitoba 
Manitoba is a province in west Canada.  
 
Mantle 
The mantle is the layer of the earth's crust between the crust and the 
core.  
 
Maputo 
Maputo is the capital of Mozambique.  
 
Maracaibo 
Maracaibo is an oil-exporting port in Venezuela on the channel connecting 
Lake Maracaibo with the Gulf of Venezuela.  
 
Marche 
Marche is a region of east central Italy consisting of the provinces of 
Ancona, Ascoli Piceno, Macerata and Pesaro e Urbino.  
 
Margate 
Margate is a seaside resort town in Kent. 
 
Mariana Trench 
The mariana trench is a 2414 km long gorge in the north west Pacific. 
 
Marianas 
The Marianas is an archipelago in the north west Pacific. 
 
Market Bosworth 
Market Bosworth is a village 19km west of Leicester in England. 
 
Marlborough 
Marlborough is a town in Wiltshire. 
 
Marmara 
Marmara is a small inland sea separating Turkey in Europe from Turkey in 
Asia. It is 275 km long and 80 km wide.  
 
Marocco 
Marocco is a 19th century spelling for Morocco. 
 
Marple 
Marple is a residential town in Greater Manchester, England. It is 5km 
east of Stockport. 
 
Marrakesh 
Marrakesh is a town in Morocco in the foothills of the Atlas Mountains. 
 
Mars 
Mars is the fourth planet from the sun. 
 
Marseilles 
Marseilles is the chief seaport in France, and an important industrial 
centre.  
 
Marshall Islands 
The Marshall islands are a group of 2 chains of islands in the west 
Pacific. They have a total area of 181.3 km2. 
The climate is wet season May to November; hot and humid; islands border 
typhoon belt 
The terrain is low coral limestone and sand islands. 
Natural resources are phosphate deposits, marine products, deep seabed 
minerals 
The religion is predominantly Christian, mostly Protestant. 
The language is English universally spoken and is the official language; 
two major Marshallese dialects from Malayo-Polynesian family; Japanese. 
 
Martinique 
Martinique is an island country in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 
1,100 km2. 
The climate is tropical; moderated by trade winds; rainy season (June to 
October) 
The terrain is mountainous with indented coastline and dormant volcanos. 
Natural resources are coastal scenery and beaches, cultivable land. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic, 5% Hindu and pagan African. 
The language is French, Creole patois. 
 
Maryland 
Maryland is an eastern state of the USA.  
 
Maseru 
Maseru is the capital of Lesotho. 
 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts is a state in the USA.  
 
Massif Central 
Massif Central is a mountainous plateau region of southern central 
France.  
 
Mataro 
Mataro is a seaport in Spain near Barcelona.  
 
Mato Grosso 
Mato Grosso is a region of south west Brazil. 
 
Mauritania 
Mauritania is a country in north west Africa. It has a total area of 
1,030,700 km2. 
The climate is desert; constantly hot, dry, dusty. 
The terrain is mostly barren, flat plains of the Sahara; some central 
hills. 
Natural resources are iron ore, gypsum, fish, copper, phosphate. 
The religion is nearly 100% Muslim. 
The language is Hasaniya Arabic (national); French (official); 
Toucouleur, Fula, Sarakole, Wolof.  
 
Mauritius 
Mauritius is an island country in the Indian ocean east of Madagascar. It 
has a total area of 1,860 km2. 
The climate is tropical modified by southeast trade winds; warm, dry 
winter (May to November); hot, wet, humid summer (November to May). 
The terrain is small coastal plain rising to discontinuous mountains 
encircling central plateau. 
Natural resources are arable land, fish. 
The religion is 51% Hindu, 30% Christian (mostly Roman Catholic with a 
few Anglicans), 17% Muslim, 2% other 
The language is English (official), Creole, French, Hindi, Urdu, Hakka, 
Bojpoori. 
 
Mayo 
Mayo is a county in Connacht province, Republic of Ireland. 
 
Mayotte 
Mayotte is an island in the Comoro Archipelago. It has a total area of 
375 km2. 
The climate is tropical; marine; hot, humid, rainy season during 
northeastern monsoon (November to May); dry season is cooler (May to 
November). 
The terrain is generally undulating with ancient volcanic peaks, deep 
ravines. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is 99% Muslim; remainder Christian, mostly Roman Catholic. 
The language is Mahorian (a Swahili dialect), French. 
 
Mbabane 
Mbabane is the capital of Swaziland.  
 
Mbabne 
Mbabne is the capital of Swaziland. 
 
Meath 
Meath is a county in Leinster province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Mecca 
Mecca is a city in Saudi Arabia and the birth place of Muhammad.  
 
Medellin 
Medellin is an industrial town in central Cordillera, Columbia. 
 
Medina 
Medina is a city in Saudi Arabia 355km north of Mecca.  
 
Mediterranean 
The mediterranean is an inland sea separating Africa from Europe. 
 
Medoc 
Medoc is a wine producing region of bordeaux in south west France.  
 
Medway 
The River Medway is a river dividing East and West Kent. It flows to the 
Thames estuary.  
 
Meghalaya 
Meghalaya is a state in north east India. 
 
Megiddo 
Megiddo is the site of a former fortress town in northern Israel. 
 
Mekong 
The Mekong is a river which rises in Tibet and flows 4500km to the South 
China Sea. 
 
Melbourne 
Melbourne is the capital of Victoria. 
 
Melksham 
Melksham is a town in Wiltshire on the River Avon. In medieval times 
Melksham was surrounded by forest, but it has developed since then.  
 
Memphis 
Memphis is a city on the river Mississippi in Tennesse, USA. It was the 
site of the assassination of Martin Luther King in 1968.  
 
Mendips 
The mendips are a range of hills 40 km long and 8 km wide in Somerset.  
 
Mercia 
Mercia was a region of England in Anglo-Saxon times.  
 
Meroe 
Meroe was an ancient city in Sudan on the Nile near Khartoum. It was the 
capital of Nubia from 600BC until 350AD. 
 
Mersey 
The Mersey River rises in the Pennines and flows 113 km to the Irish Sea 
at Liverpool.  
 
Merseyside 
Merseyside is a metropolitan county in north west England.  
 
Mesopotamia 
Mesopotamia was the land between the river Euphrates and the river 
Tigris. Today it is part of Iraq.  
 
Mexico 
Mexico is a country in Central America. It has a total area of 1,972,550 
km2. 
The climate is varies from tropical to desert. 
The terrain is high, rugged mountains, low coastal plains, high plateaus, 
and desert 
Natural resources are crude oil, silver, copper, gold, lead, zinc, 
natural gas, timber 
The religion is 97% nominally Roman Catholic, 3% Protestant. 
The language is Spanish.  
 
Mexico City 
Mexico City is the capital of Mexico. 
 
Miami 
Miami is a city and port in Florida.  
 
Michigan 
Michigan is a state in northern USA.  
 
Michipicoten 
The Michipicoten River flows 200 km through Ontario to Lake Superior. 
 
Mid Glamorgan 
Mid Glamorgan is a county in Wales. 
 
Middlesbrough 
Middlesbrough is a town in Cleveland, England.  
 
Middlesex 
Middlesex was once an English county. It is now part of Greater London. 
 
Midhurst 
Midhurst is a small town in Sussex. 
 
Midi-Pyrenees 
Midi-Pyrenees is a region of south western France.  
 
Midlands 
The Midlands is a region of England corresponding roughly with the old 
region of Mercia.  
 
Midway Islands 
The Midway Islands are 2 islands in the Pacific north west of Honolulu. 
They have a total area of 5.2 km2. 
The climate is tropical, but moderated by prevailing easterly winds. 
The terrain is low, nearly level. 
Natural resources are fish and wildlife.  
 
Milan 
Milan is an industrial city and the capital of Lombardy in Italy. 
 
Milano 
Milano is the Italian name for Milan. 
 
Milwaukee 
Milwaukee is an industrial port in Wisconsin, USA.  
 
Mindanao 
Mindanao is the 2nd largest of the philippines. 
 
Minehead 
Minehead is a seaside resort town in Somerset. During the Middle Ages 
Minehead was an important fishing port. 
 
Minnesota 
Minnesota is a north west state in the USA. 
 
Minorca 
Minorca is the 2nd largest Balearic Island. 
 
Minsk 
Minsk is an industrial city and capital of Byelorussia. 
 
Mississippi 
Mississippi is a southern state of the USA. 
 
Missouri 
Missouri is a central state in the USA. The Missouri is the longest river 
in the USA. It is 3942km long.  
 
Missouri River 
The Missouri River is a river in central USA. It is a tributary of the 
Mississippi which it joins at St Louis.  
 
Misti 
Misti is an inactive volcano in Peru. It stands 5801 metres high. 
 
Mitidja 
Mitidja is a plain in Algeria. It borders the Meditteranean.  
 
Mjosa 
Mjosa is the largest lake in Norway. It is 88km long. 
 
Moab 
Moab was an ancient country in Jordan east of the southern part of the 
River Jordan and the Dead Sea. 
 
Mobile 
Mobile is a seaport in Alabama on the River Mobile. 
 
Modane 
Modane is a town in south east Savole in France.  
 
Modena 
Modena is a town in Italy.  
 
Modesto 
Modesto is a town in California, USA. Primary industry is peach 
production. 
 
Mogadishu 
Mogadishu is the capital and chief port of Somalia. 
 
Mojave 
see "Mojave_Desert" 
 
Mojave Desert 
The Mojave Desert is an arid region of southern California. 
 
Moldavia 
Moldavia is a country in east Europe. 
 
Mombasa 
Mombasa is an industrial port in Kenya, built upon Mombasa Island and the 
adjacent mainland.  
 
Mon 
Mon is an island off the coast of Sjaaelland, Denmark.  
 
Mona Passage 
The Mona Passage is the straight in the Caribbean sea separating 
Hispaniola from Puerto Rico. 
 
Monaco 
Monaco is a country in south Europe. It has a total area of 1.9 km2 
The climate is Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers. 
The terrain is hilly, rugged, rocky. 
It has no natural resources. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic. 
The language is French (official), English, Italian, Monegasque.  
 
Monaghan 
Monaghan is a county of Ulster province, Northern Ireland.  
 
Mondego 
The Mondego is a 208 km long river in Portugal. 
 
Mongolia 
Mongolia is a country in central east Asia. It has a total area of 
1,565,000 km2. 
The climate is desert; continental (large daily and seasonal temperature 
ranges) 
The terrain is vast semidesert and desert plains; mountains in west and 
southwest; Gobi Desert in southeast 
Natural resources are coal, copper, molybdenum, tungsten, phosphates, 
tin, nickel, zinc, wolfram, fluorspar, gold 
The religion is predominantly Tibetan Buddhist, about 4% Muslim. 
The language is Khalkha Mongol used by over 90% of population; minor 
languages include Turkic, Russian, and Chinese.  
 
Monmouthshire 
Monmouthshire is a former county of Wales.  
 
Monrovia 
Monrovia is the capital of Libya. 
 
Mont Blanc 
Mont Blanc is the highest mountain in the Alps at 4807 meters high. 
 
Montana 
Montana is a state in west USA. 
 
Monte Bello Island 
Monte Bello Island is a small island off the north west coast of 
Australia. The first British atomic weapon was exploded here in 1952.  
 
Montenegro 
Montenegro is a region of Yugolsavia. 
 
Monteria 
Monteria is the capital city of Cordoba province in Colombia. 
 
Monterrey 
Monterrey is an industrial city in north east Mexico. 
 
Montevideo 
Montevideo is the capital of Uruguay. 
 
Montreal 
Montreal is an inland port and industrial city in Quebec, Canada. It 
stands at the junction of the Ottawa River and St. Lawrence River. 
 
Montserrat 
Montserrat is a volcanic island in the Caribbean. 
 
Moravia 
Moravia is a district of central europe.  
 
Morelia 
Morelia is a town in west Mexico. It is built on a rocky hill.  
 
Moreton 
Moreton is a town in Dorset beside the River Frome. 
 
Morocco 
Morocco is a country in north west Africa. It has a total area of 446,550 
km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean, becoming more extreme in the interior. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with rich coastal plains. 
Natural resources are phosphates, iron ore, manganese, lead, zinc, fish, 
salt 
The religion is 98.7% Muslim, 1.1% Christian, 0.2% Jewish. 
The language is Arabic (official); several Berber dialects; French is 
language of business, government, diplomacy, and postprimary education.  
 
Moscow 
Moscow is the capital of Russia.  
 
Mount Cook 
Mount Cook is the highest point at 3764 meters of the Southern Alps, in 
New Zealand.  
 
Mount Erebus 
see "Erebus" 
 
Mount Fuji 
see "Fujiyama" 
 
Mount McKinley 
Mount McKinley is a mountain peak in Alaska, the highest in North America 
at 6194 meters. 
 
Mount of Olives 
The Mount of Olives is a range of hills east of Jersualem.  
 
Mount St Helens 
Mount St Helens is a volcanic mountain in Washington state, USA.  
 
Mozambique 
Mozambique is a country in south east Africa. It has a total area of 
801,590 km2. 
The climate is tropical to subtropical. 
The terrain is mostly coastal lowlands, uplands in center, high plateaus 
in northwest, mountains in west 
Natural resources are coal, titanium. 
The religion is 60% indigenous beliefs, 30% Christian, 10% Muslim. 
The language is Portuguese (official); many indigenous dialects.  
 
Munchen 
see "Munich" 
 
Munich 
Munich is an industrial city and the capital of Bavaria, Germany. 
 
Munster 
Munster is a southern province of the Republic of Ireland.  
 
Murmansk 
Murmansk is a seaport in north west Russia on the Barents Sea.  
 
Murray 
The Murray is the principal river in Australia. 
 
Muscat 
Muscat is the capital of Oman.  
 
My Lai 
My Lai is a village in southern Vietnam. It was the scene of the massacre 
of 109 civilians by USA troops under the command of Lt William Calley in 
1968.  
 
Mycenae 
Mycenae was an ancient Greek city in the East Peloponnese which gave its 
name to the Mycenaen civilization. 
 
N'Djamena 
N'Djamena is the capital of Chad. 
 
Nachingwea 
Nachingwea is a military training base in Tanzania that was used by the 
ANC.  
 
Nadir 
The Nadir is the point opposite to the Zenith, i.e., the point of the 
heavens directly below the observer.  
 
Nagaland 
Nagaland is a state in north east India.  
 
Nagano 
Nagano is a city on the River Sinanogawa in Japan. It is a cultural 
centre with industry comprised of publishing, manufacturing and food-
processing.  
 
Nagasaki 
Nagasaki is an industrial port on Kyushu Island, Japan. It was destroyed 
by an antomic bomb dropped on it by the USA on 9th August 1945.  
 
Nagorno Karabakh 
Nagorno Karabakh is a region of Azerbaijan. 
 
Nagoya 
Nagoya is the 3rd city of Japan. It is a major port and industrial 
centre.  
 
Naha 
Naha is the capital city of Okinawa Island. 
 
Nairobi 
Nairobi is the capital of Kenya.  
 
Naivasha 
Lake Naivasha was a Maasai grazing ground outside of Nairobi until it was 
discovered by Joseph Thomson in 1884. The British persuaded the Maasai to 
give up their grazing rights so that villas for white settlers could be 
built. Today Lake Naivasha is a beauty spot and home to a plethora of 
wildlife. 
 
Nakua'lofa 
Nakua'lofa is the capital of Tonga. 
 
Namibia 
Namibia is a country in south west Africa. It has a total area of 824,290 
km2. 
The climate is desert; hot, dry; rainfall sparse and erratic. 
The terrain is mostly high plateau; Namib Desert along coast; Kalahari 
Desert in east. 
Natural resources are diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, lead, tin, zinc, 
salt, vanadium, natural gas, fish; suspected deposits of coal and iron 
ore. 
The religion is predominantly Christian. 
The language is Afrikaans principal language of about 60% of white 
population, German of 33%, and English of 7% (all official); several 
indigenous languages.  
 
Nanchang 
Nanchang is an industrial city and the capital of Jianqxi province, 
China.  
 
Nanjing 
Nanjing is the capital of Jiangsu.  
 
Nanning 
Nanning is an industrial river port and the capital of Guangxi Zhuang 
region, China.  
 
Naples 
Naples is an industrial port and capital of Campania, Italy on the 
Tyrrhenian Sea coast.  
 
Naseby 
Naseby is a village in Northamptonshire, England. It was the scene of a 
decisive battle in the English civil war when the Royalists were defeated 
by the Oliver Cromwell and General Fairfax. 
 
Nashville 
Nashville is the capital of Tennessee.  
 
Nassau 
Nassau is the capital of the Bahamas. 
 
Natal 
Natal is a province in South Africa north east of Cape Province in 
southern Africa. 
 
Nauru 
Nauru is an island country in the south west Pacific (Polynesia). It has 
a total area of 21 km2. 
The climate is tropical; monsoonal; rainy season (November to February). 
The terrain is sandy beach rises to fertile ring around raised coral 
reefs with phosphate plateau in center. 
Natural resources are phosphates. 
The religion is Christian (two-thirds Protestant, one-third Roman 
Catholic). 
The language is Nauruan, a distinct Pacific Island language (official); 
English widely understood, spoken, and used for most government and 
commercial purposes.  
 
Navarre 
Navarre is an autonomous mountain region of northern Spain. 
 
Nebraska 
Nebraska is a state in central USA. 
 
Negev 
The Negev is a desert in south Israel.  
 
Negril 
Negril is a tourist resort in west Jamaica. The beach is 11km long and 
protected by an off-shore reef. If you visit, watchout for the "wolves". 
If you don't know what a "wolf" is, then be prepared to spend a lot of 
money! 
 
Nepal 
Nepal is a country in the himalayas. It has a total area of 140,800 km2. 
The climate is varies from cool summers and severe winters in north to 
subtropical summers and mild winter in south 
The terrain is Tarai or flat river plain of the Ganges in south, central 
hill region, rugged Himalayas in north 
Natural resources are quartz, water, timber, hydroelectric potential, 
scenic beauty; small deposits of lignite, copper, cobalt, iron ore. 
The religion is only official Hindu state in world, although no sharp 
distinction between many Hindu (about 88% of population) and Buddhist 
groups; small groups of Muslims and Christians. 
The language is Nepali (official); 20 languages divided into numerous 
dialects.  
 
Netherlands 
The Netherlands is a country in west Europe. has a total area of 37,290 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters. 
The terrain is mostly coastal lowland and reclaimed land (polders); some 
hills in southeast. 
Natural resources are natural gas, crude oil, fertile soil. 
The religion is 36% Roman Catholic, 27% Protestant, 4% other, 33% 
unaffiliated. 
The language is Dutch. 
 
Netherlands Antilles 
The Netherlands Antilles are two groups of islands in the caribbean 
belonging to the Netherlands, but having full autonomy. 
 
Netherlands Antilles 
The Netherlands Antilles are two islands in the Caribbean near Venezuela. 
 
Nevada 
Nevada is a state in west USA.  
 
New Brighton 
New Brighton is a town in Merseyside, England at the entrance to the 
Mersey estuary. It is a resort and residential town. 
 
New Brunswick 
New Brunswick is a province in east Canada. 
 
New Brusnwick 
New Brusnwick is a maritime province in east Canada.  
 
New Caledonia 
New caledonia is an island group in the south Pacific. It was discovered 
by Cook on 4th September 1774. 
 
New Guinea 
New Guinea is an island in the south west Pacific.  
 
New Hampshire 
New Hampshire is a state in north east USA. 
 
New Hebrides 
New Hebrides was the name of Vanuatu until 1980.  
 
New Jersey 
New Jersey is a state in north east USA.  
 
New Mexico 
New Mexico is a state in south west USA.  
 
New Orleans 
New Orleans is a commercial and industrial city and river port on the 
Mississippi river in Louisiana, USA.  
 
New South Wales 
New south Wales is a state in south east Australia. 
 
New York 
New York is a state in north east USA.  
 
New Zealand 
New Zealand is a two island country in the south Pacific. It has a total 
area of 268,680 km2. 
The climate is temperate with sharp regional contrasts. 
The terrain is predominately mountainous with some large coastal plains. 
Natural resources are natural gas, iron ore, sand, coal, timber, 
hydropower, gold, limestone 
The religion is 81% Christian, 18% none or unspecified, 1% Hindu, 
Confucian, and other. 
The language is English (official), Maori.  
 
Newbury 
Newbury is a town in Berkshire north of Basingstoke. It was a prehistoric 
settlement and the Normans built a castle here. Today Newbury is famous 
the world over for its race course. 
 
Newcastle Upon Tyne 
Newcastle-Upon-Tyne is an industrial port and commercial centre in Tyne 
And Wear, England.  
 
Newfoundland 
Newfoundland is a province in north east Canada bordering the Atlantic. 
 
Newhaven 
Newhaven is a seaport town in Sussex. It hosts the cross-channel ferry 
service to Dieppe. 
 
Newport 
Newport is a town on the Isle of Wight. It is the commercial capital of 
the Isle of Wight and is situated on the River Medina.  
 
Newquay 
Newquay is a seaside resort in Cornwall. It was first a settlement during 
the Iron age. 
 
Ngong 
Ngong is an area of Kenya outside Nairobi. The Ngong Hills are revered by 
the Maasai. One Maasai story tells how a giant stripped over Kilimanjaro 
on his way north, and as he fell his hand squeezed the earth and formed 
the Ngong Hills. 
 
Niagra Falls 
Niagra Falls is two waterfalls on the Niagra River, on the Canada and USA 
border, separated by Goat Island. 
 
Niamey 
Niamey is the capital of Niger. 
 
Nicaragua 
Nicaragua is a country in Central America. It has a total area of 129,494 
km2. 
The climate is tropical in lowlands, cooler in highlands. 
The terrain is extensive Atlantic coastal plains rising to central 
interior mountains and a narrow Pacific coastal plain interrupted by 
volcanoes. 
Natural resources are gold, silver, copper, tungsten, lead, zinc, timber, 
fish. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic, 5% Protestant. 
The language is Spanish (official); English - and Indian - speaking 
minorities on the Atlantic coast.  
 
Nice 
Nice is a tourist city in southern France.  
 
Nicosia 
Nicosia is the capital of Cyprus. 
 
Niedersachsen 
Niedersachsen is the German name for Lower Saxony.  
 
Niger 
Niger is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 1,267,000 km2. 
The climate is desert, mostly hot, dry, dusty and tropical in the extreme 
south. 
The terrain is predominately desert plains and sand dunes with flat to 
rolling plains in the south and hills in the north. 
Natural resources are uranium, coal, iron ore, tin and phosphates. 
The religion is 80% Muslim, remainder indigenous beliefs and Christians. 
The language is French (official); Hausa, Djerma.  
 
Nigeria 
Nigeria is a country in west Africa. The climate is tropical in the 
center and arid in the north. 
The terrain is southern lowlands merge into central hills and plateaus 
with mountains in the southeast and plains in north. 
Natural resources are crude oil, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal, 
limestone, lead, zinc and natural gas. 
The religion is 50% Muslim, 40% Christian, 10% indigenous beliefs. 
The language is English (official); Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Fulani, and 
several other languages also widely used.  
 
Nile 
The Nile is the world's longest river and is in Africa. 
 
Ningxia Hui 
Ningxia Hui is an autonomous region of north west China.  
 
Niue 
Niue (Savage Island) was formerly one of the Cook Islands. It has a total 
area of 260 km2. 
The climate is tropical; modified by southeast trade winds. 
The terrain is steep limestone cliffs along coast, central plateau. 
Natural resources are fish, arable land. 
The religion is 75% Ekalesia Nieue (Niuean Church)-a Protestant church 
closely related to the London Missionary Society, 10% Mormon, 5% Roman 
Catholic, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventist. 
The language is Polynesian tongue closely related to Tongan and Samoan; 
English.  
 
Niut Ammon 
Niut Ammon was the Egyptian name of the city of Thebes. 
 
Norfolk 
Norfolk is a county on the east coast of England. 
 
Norfolk Island 
Norfolk Island is a remote Pacific island. It was discovered by Cook in 
1774. It was a penal settlement from 1788 to 1853. It is now a tourist 
resort. It has a total area of 34.6 km2. 
The climate is subtropical, mild, little seasonal temperature variation. 
The terrain is volcanic formation with mostly rolling plains. 
Natural resources are fish. 
The religion is Anglican, Roman Catholic, Uniting Church in Australia, 
and Seventh-Day Adventist. 
The language is English (official) and Norfolk - a mixture of 18th 
century English and ancient Tahitian.   
 
Normandy 
Normandy is a region of north France. 
 
North Carolina 
North Carolina is a state in the USA. 
 
North Dakota 
North Dakota is a state in the USA. 
 
North Korea 
North Korea is a country in east Asia. has a total area of 120,540 km2. 
The climate is temperate with the rainfall concentrated in the summer. 
The terrain is mostly hills and mountains separated by deep, narrow 
valleys; coastal plains wide in west, discontinuous in east. 
Natural resources are coal, lead, tungsten, zinc, graphite, magnesite, 
iron ore, copper, gold, pyrites, salt, fluorspar, hydropower, 
The religion is Buddhism and Confucianism; religious activities now 
almost nonexistent. 
The language is Korean.  
 
North Moravia 
North Moravia is a region of Czechoslovkia. 
 
North Sea 
The North Sea is the sea to the east of Britain.  
 
North-West Passage 
The North-West Passage is a sea route from the Atlantic to the Pacific 
around the north of Canada.  
 
Northamptonshire 
Northamptonshire is a county in central England.  
 
Northern Ireland 
Northern Ireland is a part of Ireland which was created in 1921 when the 
mainly Protestant counties of Ulter withdrew from the newly formed Irish 
Free State. It is part of Great Britain and comes under English rule. 
 
Northern Territory 
Northern territory is a territory of Australia. 
 
Northumberland 
Northumberland is a county in north England.  
 
Northumbria 
Northumbria was an Anglo-Saxon kingdom covering north east England and 
south east Scotland. 
 
Northwest territories 
Northwest territories are a territory of Canada.  
 
Norway 
Norway is a Scandinavian country in north west Europe. It has a total 
area of 324,220 km2. 
The climate is temperate along coast, modified by North Atlantic Current; 
colder interior; rainy year-round on west coast. 
The terrain is glaciated; mostly high plateaus and rugged mountains 
broken by fertile valleys; small, scattered plains; coastline deeply 
indented by fjords; arctic tundra in north. 
Natural resources are crude oil, copper, natural gas, pyrites, nickel, 
iron ore, zinc, lead, fish, timber, hydropower. 
The religion is 94% Evangelical Lutheran (state church), 4% other 
Protestant and Roman Catholic, 2% other. 
The language is Norwegian (official); small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking 
minorities. 
 
Norwich 
Norwich is a city in Norfolk, England on the River Wensum. It has a 
university and a castle. Its main industry is footwear and printing. 
Norwich is a town in Conneecticut, USA. Its industry is comprised 
primarily of textiles. 
 
Nottingham 
Nottingham is an industrial city in Nottinghamshire, England. 
 
Nottinghamshire 
Nottinghamshire is a county in central England. 
 
Nouakchott 
Nouakchott is the capital of Mauritania.  
 
Nova Scotia 
Nova scotia is a province in east Canada. 
 
Novi Sad 
Novi Sad is an industrial and commercial city and capital of Vojvodina 
province, Yugoslavia. It is located on the River Danube. 
 
Noviomagus 
see "Chichester" 
 
Novosibirsk 
Novosibirsk is an industrial city in west Siberia.  
 
Nuba 
The nuba is a mountain range in Sudan.  
 
Nukua'lofa 
Nukua'lofa is the capital of Tonga. 
 
Numazu 
Numazu is a manufacturing town on Honshu island, Japan. 
 
Nuremberg 
Nuremberg is an industrial city in Bavaria, Germany.  
 
Nuuk 
Nuuk is the Greenland name for Godthaab.  
 
Nykobing 
Nykobing is a seaport in Denmark. 
 
Oadby 
Oadby is a town in Leicestershire. It is 5KM south east of Leicester. 
 
Oahu 
Oahu is the main island of Hawaii. Honolulu is on Oahu island.  
 
Oare 
Oare is a village in Somerset in the Exmoor valley. 
 
Oaxaca 
Oaxaca is the capital city of Oaxaca state in Mexico. It is the site of 
gold and silver mines. Oaxaca is a mountainous, agricultural state on 
Mexico's Pacific coast. 
 
Ob 
The Ob is a river in Siberia. It flows 4160 km from the Altai mountains 
to the Gulf of Ob.  
 
Oberammergau 
Oberammergau is a village in Bavaria. 
 
Ocean 
An ocean is a great expanse of water which surrounds the land masses of 
the earth.  
 
Oder 
The Oder river flows 896 km from Moravia to the Baltic through Silesia 
and Pomerania forming a frontier between Poland and Germany. 
 
Odessa 
Odessa is a port on the Black Sea built by the Empress Catharine of 
Russia in 1784. 
 
Offa's Dyke 
Offa's Dyke is an earthwork which was constructed by Offa, then King of 
Mercia, in in the 8th century as a boundary between Wales and England.  
 
Offaly 
Offaly is a county of Leinster province, Republic of Ireland. 
 
Offenbach 
Offenbach is a town in Germany on the River Malne.  
 
Ogbomosho 
Ogbomosho is a commercial city in western Nigeria.  
 
Ohio 
Ohio is a mid west state in the USA. It was settled by the French in 
1673.  
 
Okehampton 
Okehampton is a town in Devon on dartmoor.  
 
Okhotsk 
The Sea of Okhotsk is an arm of the North Pacific Ocean between the 
Kamchatka Peninsula and Sakhalin. It is frozen most of the year, clearing 
in summer, and is often fogbound. 
 
Okinawa 
Okinawa is an island in the west Pacific. 
 
Oklahoma 
Oklahoma is a state in south west USA.  
 
Olenek 
The Olenek is a river in northern Siberia. It flows 2160 km west from the 
Lena River to the Laptev Sea. 
 
Olten 
Olten is a town in Switzerland on the River Aare. 
 
Olympus 
Olympus is the name of several mountains in Greece. The most famous being 
Miunt Olympus north of Thessaly.  
 
Oman 
Oman is a country in Arabia.  
 
Omdurman 
Omdurman is a city in Sudan on the White Nile, opposite Khartoum. It was 
the scene of a battle in 1898 when the Mahdi were defeated by the British 
under Kitchener. 
 
Omsk 
Omsk is a city in west Siberia at the confluence of the Irtysh and Om 
rivers. It is an important railway port on the Trans-Siberian railway.  
 
Omuta 
Omuta is a seaport town in west Kyushu, Japan, on the Amakusa Sea coast.  
 
Ontario 
Ontario is a province in central Canada. 
Lake Ontario is the smallest and easternmost of the Great Lakes. It is on 
the USA Canada border and drains into the St. Lawrence River.  
 
Oporto 
Oporto is an industrial city in Portugal on the Douro river, 5km from its 
mouth.  
 
Orange Free State 
The Orange Free State is a province of South Africa.  
 
Orasul Stalin 
Orasul Stalin was the name of the Romanian town of Brasov from 1948 to 
1956.  
 
Oregon 
Oregon is a state in the west of the USA. 
 
Orinocco 
The Orinocco is a river in South America. It flows 2400km through 
Venezuela to form part of the boundary with Colombia. 
 
Orinoco 
The orinoco is a river in south America.  
 
Orissa 
Orissa is a state in north east India.  
 
Orkney 
see "Orkney_Islands" 
 
Orkney islands 
The orkney islands are a group of islands off the north east coast of 
Scotland. 
 
Osaka 
Osaka is an industrial port on Honshu island, Japan.  
 
Oshogbo 
Oshogbo is a city and trading centre on the River Niger in west Nigeria.  
 
Oslo 
Oslo is the capital of Norway.  
 
Ostava 
Ostava is an industrial city in Czechoslovakia. 
 
Osterreich 
Osterreich is the Austrian name for Austria.  
 
Ostia 
Ostia is an ancient town in Italy near the mouth of the Tiber.  
 
Otaru 
Otaru is a seaport town in Japan. 
 
Ottawa 
Ottawa is the capital of Canada.  
 
Otterbourne 
Otterbourne is a village in Hampshire in the Itchen valley on the 
Southampton to Winchester road. 
 
Ouagadougou 
Ouagadougou is the capital of Burkina Faso. 
 
Oudh 
Oudh is a region of northern India, it is now part of Uttar Pradesh.  
 
Ouse 
The Ouse is a river formed by the river Swale and river Ure. It flows 
through North Yorkshire and Humberside to the humber estuary. It is 208km 
long. The Ouse is a river in East Sussex which flows to the English 
Channel at Newhaven. It is 48km long. The Great Ouse is a river which 
rises in south Northamptonshire and flows north east to the Wash. It is 
250km long. 
 
Oxford 
Oxford is a famous university city about 80 km west of London.  
 
Oxfordshire 
Oxfordshire is a county in south England. 
 
Ozark Mountains 
The Ozark Mountains are a forested mountain range in Oklahoma and 
Arkansas, USA.  
 
Ozd 
Ozd is a town in Hungary. 
 
Pacific 
The Pacific ocean is the world's largest ocean. 
 
Padstow 
Padstow is a fishing town in Cornwall.  
 
Padua 
Padua is a city in north Italy, 45km west of Venice.  
 
Pakistan 
Pakistan is a muslim republic in south Asia. It has a total area of 
803,940 km2. 
The climate is mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic in 
north. 
The terrain is flat Indus plain in east; mountains in north and 
northwest; Balochistan plateau in west. 
Natural resources are land, extensive natural gas reserves, limited crude 
oil, poor quality coal, iron ore, copper, salt, limestone. 
The religion is 97% Muslim (77% Sunni, 20% Shia), 3% Christian, Hindu, 
and other. 
The language is Urdu and English (official); total spoken languages-64% 
Punjabi, 12% Sindhi, 8% Pashtu, 7% Urdu, 9% Balochi and other; English is 
lingua franca of Pakistani elite and most government ministries, but 
official policies are promoting its gradual replacement by Urdu. 
 
Palau 
Palau was a former name, until 1981, of the Republic of Belau in the west 
Pacific.  
 
Palermo 
Palermo is a seaport and the capital of Sicily. 
 
Palestine 
Palestine is the area of between the mediterranean and the river Jordan.  
 
Palma 
Palma is an industrial port and resort and capital of the Balearic 
Islands on Majorca.  
 
Pamirs 
The Pamirs is a plateau in central Asia.  
 
Pampas 
Pampas are flat, treeless plains in Argentina between the Andes and the 
Atlantic. 
 
Panama 
Panama is a country in central America. It has a total area of 78,200 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy season (May 
to January), short dry season (January to May). 
The terrain is interior mostly steep, rugged mountains and dissected, 
upland plains; coastal areas largely plains and rolling hills. 
Natural resources are copper, mahogany forests, shrimp. 
The religion is over 93% Roman Catholic, 6% Protestant. 
The language is Spanish (official); 14% speak English as native tongue; 
many Panamanians bilingual.  
 
Panama Canal 
The Panama Canal is a canal across the Panama isthmus connecting the 
Pacific and the Atlantic oceans. 
 
Panama City 
Panama City is the capital of Panama. 
 
Panipat 
Panipat is a town in north west India on the Jumna river. It has been the 
scene of a number of battles. 
 
Papaloa 
The Papaloa is a river in Mexico. 
 
Papeete 
Papeete is the capital of Tahiti. 
 
Papua New Guinea 
Papua New Guinea is a country in the south west Pacific. It has a total 
area of 461,690 km2. 
The climate is tropical; northwest monsoon (December to March), southeast 
monsoon (May to October); slight seasonal temperature variation. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with coastal lowlands and rolling 
foothills. 
Natural resources are gold, copper, silver, natural gas, timber, oil 
potential. 
The religion is over half of population nominally Christian (490,000 
Roman Catholic, 320,000 Lutheran, other Protestant sects); remainder 
indigenous beliefs. 
The language is 715 indigenous languages; English spoken by 1-2%, pidgin 
English widespread, Motu spoken in Papua region.  
 
Paraguay 
Paraguay is a country in South America. It has a total area of 406,750 
km2. 
The climate is varies from temperate in east to semiarid in far west. 
The terrain is grassy plains and wooded hills east of Rio Paraguay; Gran 
Chaco region west of Rio Paraguay mostly low, marshy plain near the 
river, and dry forest and thorny scrub elsewhere. 
Natural resources are iron ore, manganese, limestone, hydropower, timber. 
The religion is 90% Roman Catholic; Mennonite and other Protestant 
denominations. 
The language is Spanish (official) and Guarani.  
 
Paramaribo 
Paramaribo is the capital of Surinam. 
 
Parana 
The Parana is a river in South America formed by the confluence of the 
Rio Grande and Paranaiba.  
 
Paris 
Paris is a port and the capital city of France. 
 
Parma 
Parma is the capital city of Parma province in Italy. It is from Parma 
that parmesan cheese comes.  
 
Parnassus 
Parnassus is a mountain in central Greece. It stands 2457 meters high and 
was revered as the home of Apollo.  
 
Paros 
Paros is a Greek island west of Naxos. It is the source of Parian marble. 
 
Parthia 
Parthia was an ancient country in west Asia in what is now north eastern 
Iran.  
 
Passchendaele 
Passchendaele is a village in west Flanders, Belgium near to Ypres. 
 
Patras 
Patras is an industrial city on the Gulf of Patras, in Greece.  
 
Pays de la Loire 
Pays de la Loire is an agricultural region of west France.  
 
Pearl Harbor 
Pearl Harbor is a USA naval base in Oahu, Hawaii. 
 
Peking 
see "Beijing" 
 
Peloponnese 
Peloponnese is a peninsula forming the southern part of Greece. 
 
Pemba 
Pemba is an island with Tanzania. 
 
Pembrokeshire 
Pembrokeshire is a former county in the extreme south west of Wales. It 
became part of Dyfed in 1974. 
 
Penang 
Penang is a port on the island of Penang in Malaysia. 
 
Pennines 
The pennines are a mountain range in England. 
 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania is a state in north east USA.  
 
Pentland Firth 
The Pentland Firth is the most difficult navigational passage on the 
coasts of the United Kingdom due to the great strength of the tidal 
streams. 
 
Pentland Hills 
The Pentland Hills are a range of rounded hills in the Lothian, Borders 
and Strathclyde regions of Scotland.  
 
Pentonville 
Pentonville is a prison in Islington, London. 
 
Penzance 
Penzance is a town in Cornwall, England. It was the first Cornish town to 
become a resort. Penzance gained its prosperity from the local tin-mining 
industry, and smuggling. It was razed to the ground in 1595 by the 
Spanish, but was rebuilt.  
 
Perlis 
Perlis is a State of Malaysia.  
 
Perranporth 
Perranporth is a village in Cornwall. It was originally a tin-mining 
village, reaching its peak in 1874. Today it is a seaside resort.  
 
Persepolis 
Persepolis was the ancient capital of the Persian Empire. It was located 
65km north west of Shiraz. 
 
Persia 
Persia was an ancient kingdom in south west Asia. 
 
Persian Gulf 
The Persian Gulf is a shallow bay linked by the Strait of Hormuz and the 
Gulf of Oman to the Arabian Sea. 
 
Perth 
Perth is the capital of western Australia.  
 
Perthshire 
Perthshire is a former inland county of central Scotland. 
 
Peru 
Peru is a country in South America. It has a total area of 1,285,220 km2. 
The climate varies from tropical in the east to dry desert in the west. 
The terrain is western coastal plain (costa), high and rugged Andes in 
center (sierra), eastern lowland jungle of Amazon Basin (selva). 
Natural resources are copper, silver, gold, petroleum, timber, fish, iron 
ore, coal, phosphate, potash. 
The religion is predominantly Roman Catholic. 
The language is Spanish and Quechua (official), Aymara. 
 
Peshawar 
Peshawar is the capital of North-West Frontier Province, Pakistan.  
 
Petersfield 
Petersfield is a town in Hampshire. It was first chartered in the 12th 
century, and became properous through the wool trade and then became an 
important coaching centre. Today Petersfield is a lot quieter. 
 
Petrograd 
Petrograd was the name of Leningrad from 1914 until 1924. 
 
Petropavlovsk 
Petropavlovsk is the capital and only town in Kamchatka.  
 
Petworth 
Petworth is an old country town in Sussex. It is the site of Petworth 
house, a great mansion built by the Duke of Sommerset towards the end of 
the 17th century.  
 
Pharos 
Pharos is an island off Alexandria on which stood a tower lighthouse 
built by Ptolemy Philadelphus. 
 
Philadelphia 
Philadelphia is an industrial city and port on the Delaware river in 
Pennsylvania, USA. 
 
Philippines 
The Philippines is an archipelago country in the Pacific Ocean and South 
China Sea. It has a total area of 300,000 km2. 
The climate is tropical marine; northeast monsoon (November to April); 
southwest monsoon (May to October). 
The terrain is mostly mountains with narrow to extensive coastal 
lowlands. 
Natural resources are timber, crude oil, nickel, cobalt, silver, gold, 
salt, copper. 
The religion is 83% Roman Catholic, 9% Protestant, 5% Muslim, 3% Buddhist 
and other. 
The language is Pilipino (based on Tagalog) and English; both 
official.*Poland 
Poland is a country in central Europe. 
 
Phnom Penh 
Phnom Penh is the capital of Kampuchea. 
 
Phoenicia 
Phoenicia was a country in the ancient world. It was located on a narrow 
strip of land along the coast of what is now called Lebanon. 
 
Phoenix 
Phoenix is the capital of Arizona.  
 
Phom Penh 
Phom Penh is the capital of Kampuchea.  
 
Phrygia 
Phrygia is a former kingdom of western Asia covering Anatolia.  
 
Picardy 
Picardy was a province of northern France between Normandy and Flanders.  
 
Pichincha 
Pichincha is an inactive volcano in Ecuador. It stands 4789 metres high.  
 
Piddletrenthide 
Piddletrenthide is one of the most scenic villages in Dorset. 
 
Piedmont 
Piedmont is a region of northern Italy bordering Switzerland on the north 
and France on the west. 
 
Pilgrims' Way 
The Pilgrims' Way is a track running from Winchester to Canterbury, 
England which was the route of medieval pilgrims visiting the shrine of 
Thomas a Becket.  
 
Pisa 
Pisa is a city in Tuscany, Italy famous for its leaning tower.  
 
Pitcairn islands 
The Pitcairn islands are a British colony north east of New Zealand. They 
have a total area of 47 km2. 
The climate is tropical, hot, humid, modified by southeast trade winds; 
rainy season (November to March). 
The terrain is rugged volcanic formation; rocky coastline with cliffs. 
Natural resources are miro trees (used for handicrafts), fish. 
The religion is 100% Seventh-Day Adventist. 
The language is English (official); also a Tahitian/English dialect. 
 
Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh is an industrial city and inland port where the Allegheny and 
Monogahela meet to form the Ohio River in Pennsylvania, USA. 
 
Pizen 
Pizen is an industrial city and capital of Zapadocesky region, 
Czechoslovakia.  
 
Plymouth 
Plymouth is a city and seaport in Devon.  
 
Pointe-Noire 
Pointe-Noire is the chief port of the Congo. It was the capital of the 
Congo from 1950 until 1958.  
 
Poitou-Charentes 
Poitou-Charentes is a region of west central France.  
 
Poland 
Poland is a country in central Europe. It has a total area of 312,680 
km2. 
The climate is temperate with cold, cloudy, moderately severe winters 
with frequent precipitation; mild summers with frequent showers and 
thundershowers. 
The terrain is mostly flat plain, mountains along southern border. 
Natural resources are coal, sulphur, copper, natural gas, silver, lead, 
salt. 
The religion is 95% Roman Catholic (about 75% practicing), 5% Russian 
Orthodox, Protestant, and other. 
The language is Polish.  
 
Pompeii 
Pompeii was an ancient city in Italy at the foor of Vesuvius, 21km south 
east of Naples. It was destroyed by an eruption of Vesuvius in 79. 
 
Pondicherry 
Pondicherry is a union territory of south east India. 
 
Poole 
Poole is a sea port in Dorset, England. It is famed for its pottery.  
 
Popocatapetl 
Popocatapetl is a volcano in Mexico. It is 5452 metres high.  
 
Popocatepeti 
Popocatepeti is a volcano in Amecameca, south east Mexico. It is 5340 
meters high.  
 
Porlock 
Porlock is a village in Somerset on the edge of Exmoor. 
 
Port Antonio 
Port Antonio is a small town with two natural harbours in east Jamaica. 
 
Port Au Prince 
Port Au Prince is the capital of Haiti. 
 
Port Elizabeth 
Port Elizabeth is an industrial port in Cape province, South Africa.  
 
Port Louis 
Port Louis is the capital of Mauritius. 
 
Port moresby 
Port moresby is the capital of Papua New Guinea.  
 
Port Morseby 
Port Morseby is a port and the capital of Papua New Guinea, on the south 
coast of New Guinea. 
  
 
Port of Spain 
Port of Spain is the capital of Trinidad and Tobago.  
 
Port Rashid 
Port Rashid is a port serving Dubai in the United Arab Emirates.  
 
Portmore 
Portmore was a large swamp in south-east Jamaica. During the mid-1990's 
it was drained and a large housing estate built upon it. As the area is 
very flat and exposed, temperatures rise to amongst the highest on the 
island.  
 
Porto Novo 
Porto Novo is the capital of Benin. 
 
Portsmouth 
Portsmouth is a seaport in Hampshire. It is home to the Royal Navy. The 
first dock was built in 1194 by Richard I. In 1495 the world's first dry 
dock was built at Portsmouth.  
 
Portugal 
Portugal is a country in south west Europe. It has a total area of 92,080 
km2. 
The climate is maritime temperate; cool and rainy in north, warmer and 
drier in south. 
The terrain is mountainous north of the Tagus, rolling plains in south. 
Natural resources are fish, forests (cork), tungsten, iron ore, uranium 
ore, marble. 
The religion is 97% Roman Catholic, 1% Protestant denominations, 2% 
other. 
The language is Portuguese. 
 
Powys 
Powys is a county in central Wales. 
 
Poznan 
Poznan is an industrial city in western Poland. 
 
Prague 
Prague is the capital of Czechoslovakia.  
 
Praia 
Praia is the capital of Cape Verde. 
 
Pressburg 
Pressburg is the German name for Bratislava.  
 
Pretoria 
Pretoria is the administrative capital of South Africa. 
 
Prince Edward Island 
Prince Edward Island is a province of Canada. It was originally called 
Isle St-Jean by Cartier who discovered it in 1534. 
 
Provence Alpes Cote d'Azur 
Provence Alpes Cote d'Azur is a region in south east France.  
 
Prussia 
Prussia was a kingdom in northern Germany from 1618 until 1867 when it 
became part of Germany.  
 
Puddletown 
Puddletown is one of the most attractive villages in Dorset.  
 
Puerto Rico 
Puerto Rico is a country in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 9,104 
km2. 
The climate is tropical marine, mild, little seasonal temperature 
variation. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with coastal plain belt in north; 
mountains precipitous to sea on west coast 
Natural resources are some copper and nickel; potential for onshore and 
offshore crude oil. 
The religion is mostly Christian, 85% Roman Catholic, 15% Protestant 
denominations and other. 
The language is Spanish (official); English is widely understood.*Punjab 
Punjab is a state in north west India.  
 
Pune 
Pune is an industrial city in Maharashtra, India. It was formerly called 
Poona. 
 
Punjab 
Punjab is a state in north west India.  
 
Pusan 
Pusan is the chief industrial port of South Korea.  
 
Pyongyang 
Pyongyang is the capital of North Korea.  
 
Pyrenees 
The Pyrenees are a mountain range between France and Spain. 
 
Pyrford 
Pyrford is an ancient village near to Woking in Surrey, England. It was 
founded at a ford over the river Wey. 
 
Qatar 
Qatar is a country in Arabia. It  a total area of 11,000 km2. 
The climate is desert; hot, dry; humid and sultry in summer. 
The terrain is mostly flat and barren desert covered with loose sand and 
gravel. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, fish. 
The religion is 95% Muslim. 
The language is Arabic (official); English is commonly used as second 
language.*Queensland 
Queensland is a state in north east Australia. 
 
Qinghai 
Qinghai is a province in north west China.  
 
Qisarya 
Qisarya is a Mediterranean port north of Tel Aviv, Israel.  
 
Quantocks 
The Quantocks are a 19 km long ridge of hills in Somerset.  
 
Quebec 
Quebec is a province and also the capital of the province in east Canada. 
 
Queen Camel 
Queen Camel is a village in Somerset. 
 
Queensland 
Queensland is a state in north east Australia.  
 
Quezon City 
Quezon City is a town in the Philippines on Luzon island. It was the 
capital of the Philippines from 1948 until 1976. 
 
Quito 
Quito is the capital of Ecuador.  
 
Rabat 
Rabat is the capital of Morocco.  
 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan is a state in north west India. 
 
Ramsgate 
Ramsgate is a town in Kent. It was once an important port, after 1827 it 
became popular as a seasid resort following a visit by George IV.  
 
Rangoon 
Rangoon is the capital of Burma.  
 
Rannoch 
Rannoch is a loch in Perth and Kinross. It is 14km long and 1.6km wide. 
It drains into the river Tay. 
 
Rapa Nui 
Rapa Nui is another name for Easter Island. 
 
Raung 
Raung is a volcano in Indonesia. It stands 3332 metres high.  
 
Rawalpindi 
Rawalpindi is a city in Punjab province, Pakistan at the foothills of the 
Himalayas.  
 
Razorbill 
The razorbill is a north atlantic sea bird. 
 
Reading 
Reading is a city in Berkshire north of Basingstoke. Reading is on the 
River Thames and because of its strategic importance was occupied by the 
Danes in 871. 
 
Red Sea 
The Red Sea is a submerged section of the Great Rift Valley. It is a sea 
2000km long with Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia and Saudi Arabia on its shores.  
 
Regina 
Regina is the capital of Saskatchewan.  
 
Regnum 
see "Selsey" 
 
Reigate 
Reigate is an old town in Surrey. It was not called Reigate until the 
12th century, previous to that it was the manor of the Earl of Surrey.  
 
Reims 
Reims is the capital of Champagne Ardenne region in France. 
 
Rennes 
Rennes is an industrial city and capital of Ille-et-Vilaine department, 
western France. 
 
Reunion 
Reunion is an island in the Indian ocean. 
 
Reykjavic 
Reykjavic is the capital of Iceland.  
 
Reykjavik 
Reykjavik is the capital of Iceland.  
 
Rhine 
The rhine is a river that rises in Switzerland and flows through Germany 
and the netherlands. 
 
Rhode Island 
Rhode island is the smallest state in the USA.  
 
Rhodes 
Rhodes is a Greek island. 
 
Rhodesia 
Rhodesia was a white ruled country in Africa. It went over to black rule 
and divided into Zambia and Zimbabwe.  
 
Rhone 
The Rhone is a river that rises in Switzerland and flows to Lyon in 
France. 
 
Ribble 
The River Ribble rises in the Pennines and flows 121 km to the Irish Sea 
near Southport.  
 
Richmond 
Richmond is a Royal manor on the River Thames in greater London.  
 
Rif 
The Rif Mountains are a mountain range in Morocco. They extend along the 
north African coast for 320 km from the Straits of Gibraltar.  
 
Riga 
Riga is the capital city of Latvia. It is a Baltic sea port.  
 
Ringwood 
Ringwood is a market town in Hampshire by the River Avon. 
 
Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro is a city in south east Brazil. It is a sea port. It is 
the capital city of Guanabara state and former federal state capital.  
 
Rio Grande 
The Rio Grande is a river rising in the rockies in Colorado and flowing 
to the Gulf of Mexico. 
The Rio Grande is the headstream of the River Parana in Brazil. It is 
1040km long. 
 
River Derwent 
The River Derwent is the largest river in Tasmania. It is 190km long. The 
River Derwent is a river in Derbyshire. It is a tribute of the River 
Trent. It is 96km long. The River Derwent is a river in north Yorkshire. 
It is a tribute of the River Ouse. It is 91km long. 
 
River Lea 
The river Lea rises in the Chiltern hills near Luton and flows south and 
east into the river Thames at East London. It is 74km long.  
 
River Ribble 
The River Ribble rises in the Pennines and flows west to the Irish sea 
near Preston. It is 120km long.  
 
River Tay 
The Tay river flows south east from Loch Tay in Perth and Kinross to the 
Firth of Tay. It is 188km long and the longest river in Scotland.  
 
River Thames 
The river Thames rises in the Cotswold hills and flows past Oxford, 
Reading, Windosr and London to the North Sea. It is 336km long. 
 
River Trent 
The River Trent rises in north staffordshire, flows around the south 
Pennines and joins the River Ouse to form the Humber estuary. It is 240km 
long.  
 
River Tummel 
The River Tummel is a tributary of the River Tay. It is 88km long.  
 
River Wear 
The river Wear rises in the Pennines, and flows through Durham to the 
North Sea at Sunderland. It is 96km long. 
 
Riyadh 
Riyadh is the royal capital of Saudi Arabia. It is 368km inland from the 
Persian Gulf.  
 
Rize 
Rize is a market city in east Turkey. 
 
Rochdale 
Rochdale is a town in Greater Manchester, England. It was the site of the 
founding of the cooperative movement in 1844. 
 
Rochester 
Rochester is a town in Kent. It was originally a Celtic settlement, it is 
now a connercial town.  
 
Rockall 
Rockall is a small island in the Atlantic Ocean 320km west of the Outer 
Hebrides. It was annexed by Britain in 1955.  
 
Rocky Mountains 
The rocky mountains are a mountain range in west USA. 
 
Romania 
Romania is a country in south east Europe. It has a total area of 237,500 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and 
fog; sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms. 
The terrain is central Transylvanian Basin is separated from the plain of 
Moldavia on the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated from the 
Walachian Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps. 
Natural resources are crude oil (reserves being exhausted), timber, 
natural gas, coal, iron ore, salt. 
The religion is 80% Romanian Orthodox; 6% Roman Catholic; 4% Calvinist, 
Lutheran, Jewish, Baptist. 
The language is Romanian, Hungarian, German. 
 
Rome 
Rome is the capital of Italy. 
 
Romsey 
Romsey is a market town in the Test Valley, Hampshire. It stands on the 
River Test 14km north west of Southampton.  
 
Ronda 
Ronda is an ancient Moorish town in Malaga, Spain.  
 
Ronne 
Ronne is the capital of Bornholm Island in Denmark. It is a fishing port 
and ceramics centre. 
 
Roosendaal 
Roosendaal is a sugar-refining town in the Netherlands. 
 
Roquefort 
Roquefort is a town in south France famous for its particular brand of 
cheese.  
 
Rorke's Drift 
Rorke's Drift is a ford on the Buffalo River in South Africa, about 32km 
south-east of Dundee. It was the scene of a famous and gallant defence by 
a few British soldiers against 4000 Zulus on January 22, 1879 in which a 
large number of Victoria Cross medals were awarded for bravery. 
 
Roscoff 
Roscoff is a seaport on the north coast of France. It was here that Mary 
Steuart landed in 1548.  
 
Roscommon 
Roscommon is a county of Connacht province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Roseau 
Roseau is the capital of Dominica.  
 
Ross Dependency 
The Ross Dependency is a large area of the Antarctic belonging to New 
Zealand.  
 
Rossendale Fells 
The Rossendale Fells is an upland in south east Lancashire. They are an 
extension of the Pennines between the River Mersey and River Ribble. 
Their  
altitude is mainly above 360m.  
 
Rostock 
Rostock is a medieval city in Germany close to the Baltic coast.  
 
Rostov 
Rostov is a port on the River Don near to the Azov Sea. It is one of 
Russia's oldest agricultural centres.  
 
Rother 
The Rother is a river in Derbyshire and south Yorkshire. It is 34km long. 
 
Rotherham 
Rotherham is a manufacturing town in South Yorkshire on the River Don 6km 
north east of Sheffield.  
 
Rothwell 
Rothwell is a coal mining town in West Yorkshire. It stands on the River 
Aire 5km south east of Leeds.  
 
Rotorua 
Rotorua is a spa town in Auckland, New Zealand. 
 
Rotterdam 
Rotterdam is a city and seaport in the Netherlands. 
 
Rottingdean 
Rottingdean is a village in Sussex 6 km from Brighton.  
 
Ruhr 
The Ruhr is a river in Germany. 
 
Runnymede 
Runnymede is a green expanse of meadows outside Egham in Surrey.  
 
Russia 
Russia is a country in east Europe. 
 
Rustavi 
Rustavi is a new town in Georgia 32km south east of Tbilisi. It has a 
large metallurgical plant.  
 
Rutbah 
Rutbah is a town on the trans-desert route from Iraq to Haifa.  
 
Rwanda 
Rwanda is a country in central Africa. It has a total area of 26,340 km2. 
The climate is temperate; two rainy seasons (February to April, November 
to January); mild in mountains with frost and snow possible. 
The terrain is mostly grassy uplands and hills; mountains in west. 
Natural resources are gold, cassiterite (tin ore), wolframite (tungsten 
ore), natural gas, hydropower. 
The religion is Roman Catholic 65%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 1%, indigenous 
beliefs and other 25%. 
The language is Kinyarwanda, French (official); Kiswahili used in 
commercial centers. 
 
Ryde 
Ryde is a seaport on the Isle of Wight. It is a popular seaside resort 
and is the main point of entry to the island with connecting ferries to 
Portsmouth.  
 
Rye 
Rye is a town in Surrey popular with tourists for its Tudor, Stuart and 
Georgian houses.  
 
Ryssel 
Ryssel is the Flemish name for Lille. 
 
Ryukyu Islands 
The Ryukyu Islands are the southernmost island group of Japan.  
 
Saarland 
Saarland is a heavily forested state in Germany.  
 
Sahara 
The Sahara is a north African desert extending from the Atlantic to the 
Nile. 
 
Saigon 
see "Ho_Chi_Minh_City" 
 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Lucia is a country in the Caribbean.  
 
Sakartvelo 
Sakartvelo is the Georgian name for the country of Georgia. 
 
Sakhalin 
Sakhalin is an island in the Pacific north of Japan.  
 
Salado 
The Salado is a river in north west Argentina. It is 800km long.  
 
Salch 
Salch is a seaport near Fez in Morocco. 
 
Salcombe 
Salcombe is a seaside resort town in Devon. 
 
Salerno 
Salerno is the capital of Salerno province in south Italy. The allied 
landings took place here in 1943. 
 
Salisbury 
Salisbury is the former name of Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe. 
Salisbury is an old town in Wiltshire built upon the junction of the 
River Avon and the River Nadder.  
 
Salt Lake City 
Salt Lake City is the capital of Utah, USA. 
 
Salvador 
Salvador is a port and naval base in Bahia state, Brazil. 
 
Salzburg 
Salzburg is the capital of Salzburg state, Austria. It stands on the 
River Salzburg.  
 
Samarkand 
Samarkand is the capital of Samarkand region, Uzbek.  
 
Samoa 
Samoa is a volcanic island group in the south west Pacific. 
 
San Antonio 
San Antonio is a city in south Texas, USA.  
 
San Diego 
San Diego is a city and military base in California, USA. 
 
San Francisco 
San Francisco is a Pacific port in California, USA. 
 
San Jose 
San Jose is the capital of Costa Rica.  
 
San Juan 
San Juan is the capital of Puerto Rico. 
 
San Luis 
San Luis is the capital of San Luis province in Argentina. It is a 
cattle, grain and wine producing centre. 
 
San Luis Potosi 
San Luis Potosi is a silver-mining city and the capital of San Luis 
Potosi state in central Mexico. 
 
San Marino 
San Marino is a country in north Italy. It has a total area of 60 km2. 
The climate is Mediterranean; mild to cool winters; warm, sunny summers. 
The terrain is rugged mountains. 
Natural resources are building stones. 
The religion is Roman Catholic. 
The language is Italian.  
 
San Salvador 
San Salvador is the capital of El Salvador. 
 
San'a 
San'a is the capital of North Yemen.  
 
Sandhurst 
Sandhurst is a village in berkshire.  
 
Sandown 
Sandown is a seaside resort on the Isle of Wight 3 km north of Shanklin.  
 
Sandwich 
Sandwich is an old town and one time naval port in Kent.  
 
Sandwich Islands 
The Sandwich Islands is a former name of Hawaii.  
 
Sangay 
Sangay is a volcano in Ecuador. It is 5410 metres high. 
 
Santiago 
Santiago is the capital of Chile. 
 
Santillana del Mar 
Santillana del Mar is a village in Santander provibce, Spain. 
 
Santo Domingo 
Santo Domingo is the capital and chief sea port of the Dominican 
Republic.  
 
Sao Paulo 
Sao Paulo is a city in Brazil. It is South America's leading industrial 
city producing electronics, steel and chemicals.  
 
Sao Tome Principe 
Sao Tome Principe is a country off the west coast of Africa. It has a 
total area of 960 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; one rainy season (October to May). 
The terrain is volcanic, mountainous. 
Natural resources are fish. 
The religion is Roman Catholic, Evangelical Protestant, Seventh-Day 
Adventist. 
The language is Portuguese (official).  
 
Sapele 
Sapele is a town in Nigeria south of Benin. It is a plywood plant.  
 
Sapporo 
Sapporo is the capital of Hokkaido, Japan.  
 
Saragossa 
Saragossa is an industrial city in Aragon, Spain. 
 
Sarajevo 
Sarajevo is the capital of Bosnia Hercegovina.  
 
Sarawak 
Sarawak is a Malaysian state on the island of Borneo. 
 
Sardinia 
Sardinia is a mountainous island in the mediterranean.  
 
Sargasso Sea 
The Sargasso Sea is part of the north Atlantic. Circling ocean currents 
leave it static, and its surface is covered with floating weed. 
 
Sark 
Sark is one of the Channel islands. 
 
Saskatchewan 
Saskatchewan is a province in west Canada.  
 
Saskatoon 
Saskatoon is a town in Canada. It is 241 km north west of Regina. 
 
Saudi Arabia 
Saudi Arabia os a country in Arabia.  
 
Sauerland 
Sauerland is a district in west Germany.  
 
Savanna-La-Mar 
Savanna-La-Mar is a sea port in south west Jamaica. It has an unusual 
claim to fame as the port most devastated by hurricanes in the world. 
 
Save 
The save is a river which rises in the alps and flows through Yugolsavia 
and Italy and terminates in the danube at belgrade.  
 
Savoy 
Savoy is an area of France between the Alps, Lake Geneva and the Rhone. 
 
Saxony 
Saxony was a former kingdom in germany. 
 
Scandinavia 
Scandinavia is a peninsula in north west Europe.  
 
Scarpe 
The scarpe is a river in France.  
 
Scilly Islands 
The Scilly Islands are a group of 140 islands south west of Cornwall. 
 
Scotland 
Scotland is a country north of England. 
 
Scyros 
Scyros is an island in the aegean sea. Theseus was killed and buried on 
Scyros. 
 
Scythia 
Scythia is a region north of the Black Sea between the Carpathian 
mountains and the river Don.  
 
Sea of Okhotsk 
see "Okhotsk" 
 
Sedgemoor 
Sedgemoor is a battlefield in Sommerset where the Duke of Monmouth was 
defeated on july the 6th 1685. 
 
Sedlescombe 
Sedlescombe is a village in Sussex dating back to at least Anglo-Saxon 
times. 
 
Seine 
The Seine is a French river.  
 
Selsey 
Selsey was once an island in the English Channel, it is now a peninsular 
in Sussex. It was the site of a Roman settlement called Regnum.  
 
Selworthy 
Selworthy is a village in the Vale of Porlock, in Somerset. 
 
Semarang 
Semarang is a port in north Java. 
 
Sempach 
Sempach is a town in Switzerland where Swiss independance was gained in 
1386. 
 
Senegal 
Senegal is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 196,190 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; rainy season (December to April) has 
strong southeast winds; dry season (May to November) dominated by hot, 
dry harmattan wind. 
The terrain is generally low, rolling, plains rising to foothills in 
southeast. 
Natural resources are fish, phosphates, iron ore. 
The religion is 92% Muslim, 6% indigenous beliefs, 2% Christian (mostly 
Roman Catholic). 
The language is French (official); Wolof, Pulaar, Diola, Mandingo. 
 
Seoul 
Seoul is the capital of South Korea.  
 
Serajevo 
Serajevo is the capital of Bosnia in Yugolsavia.  
 
Serbia 
Serbia is a country in Yugolsavia.  
 
Sevenoaks 
Sevenoaks is a residential town in Kent.  
 
Severn 
The Severn is a river in England. It rises in Plynlimmon and flows 354 km 
to the Bristol Channel. 
 
Seville 
Seville is a sea port on the Guadalquir River in Spain. It is the capital 
city of Seville province. It is a major commercial, industrial and 
cultural centre. 
 
Seychelles 
The seychelles is an island group country in the Indian ocean north of 
Madagascar. It has a total area of 455 km2. 
The climate is tropical marine; humid; cooler season during southeast 
monsoon (late May to September); warmer season during northwest monsoon 
(March to May). 
The terrain varies. The Mahe Group is granitic, narrow coastal strip, 
rocky, hilly; others are coral, flat, elevated reefs 
Natural resources are fish, copra, cinnamon trees. 
The religion is 90% Roman Catholic, 8% Anglican, 2% other. 
The language is English and French (official); Creole.  
 
Sfax 
Sfax is a sea-port in Tunisia.  
 
Shaanxi 
Shaanxi is a province of north west China.  
 
Shaftesbury 
Shaftesbury is a town in Dorset. It was originally an Anglo-Saxon 
fortified town. 
 
Shamokin 
Shamokin is a town in Pennsylvania. 
 
Shandong 
Shandong is a province in north east China. 
 
Shanghai 
Shanghai is a port on the Huang-pu and Wusong rivers in Jiangsu province, 
China.  
 
Shanklin 
Shanklin is a town in the Isle of Wight.  
 
Shannon 
The Shannon is the longest river in Ireland.  
 
Shansi 
Shansi is a province of China.  
 
Shantung 
Shantung is a province of China.  
 
Shanxi 
Shanxi is a province in north west China. 
 
Sharjah 
Sharjah is a member state of the United Arab Emirates. It is located on 
the Arabian Gulf, north east of Dubai.  
 
Sharpeville 
Sharpeville is a black township on South Africa.  
 
Shatt-al-Arab 
Shatt-al-Arab is the waterway formed by the confluence of the Euphrates 
and Tigris. It flows 190km to the Arabian Gulf. 
 
Sheba 
Sheba was the ancient name for what is now South Yemen. 
 
Shechem 
Shechem was an ancient city in Palestine, and the capital of Samaria. 
 
Sheffield 
Sheffield is an industrial city in Yorkshire, England. It is famous for 
its steel industries, and fine cutlery. 
 
Shekel 
The shekel is the currency of Israel. 
 
Shendi 
Shendi is a town in Egypt.  
 
Shensi 
Shensi is a province of China.  
 
Shenyang 
Shenyang is the capital of Liaoning.  
 
Sherborne 
Sherborne is a picturesque village in Dorset. 
 
Sherwood Forest 
Sherwood Forest is an area of west Nottinghamshire, England. It was 
formerly a royal forest.  
 
Shetland 
The shetland are a group of islands north of Scotland.  
 
Shikoku 
Shikoku is the smallest of the four main Japanese islands.  
 
Shropshire 
Shropshire is a county in west England. 
 
Shusha 
Shusha is a town and former fortress in Azerbaijan. 
 
Siberia 
Siberia is a region of north Asia.  
 
Sichuan 
Sichuan is a province in central China. 
 
Sicily 
Sicily is an island south west of Italy.  
 
Sidmouth 
Sidmouth is a seaside resort town in Devon. 
 
Sierra Leone 
Sierra Leone is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 71,740 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; summer rainy season (May to 
December); winter dry season (December to April) 
The terrain is coastal belt of mangrove swamps, wooded hill country, 
upland plateau, mountains in east. 
Natural resources are diamonds, titanium ore, bauxite, iron ore, gold, 
chromite. 
The religion is 30% Muslim, 30% indigenous beliefs, 10% Christian, 30% 
other or none. 
The language is English (official); regular use limited to literate 
minority; principal vernaculars are Mende in south and Temne in north; 
Krio is the language of the resettled ex-slave population of the Freetown 
area and is lingua franca. 
 
Sierra Madre 
Sierra Madre is a system of 3 mountain ranges in Mexico.  
 
Sikkim 
Sikkim is a state in north east India.  
 
Silchester 
Silchester is a village in Hampshire. It was originally a Celtic 
settlement. The Romans formed a settlement, calling it Calleva Atrebatum.  
 
Silesia 
Silesia is a region in Europe.  
 
Sinai 
Sinai is an Egyptian peninsula at the head of the Red Sea.  
 
Singapore 
Singapore is an island country in south east Asia. It has a total area of 
632.6 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid, rainy; no pronounced rainy or dry 
seasons; thunderstorms occur on 40% of all days (67% of days in April). 
The terrain is lowland; gently undulating central plateau contains water 
catchment area and nature preserve. 
Natural resources are fish, deepwater ports. 
The religion is majority of Chinese are Buddhists or atheists; Malays 
nearly all Muslim (minorities include Christians, Hindus, Sikhs, Taoists, 
Confucianists). 
The language is Chinese, Malay, Tamil, and English (official); Malay 
(national).  
 
Sinop 
Sinop is a sea port with a natural harbour on the Black Sea in north 
Turkey. In 1853 the Russians sank the Turkish fleet at Sinop and so began 
the Crimean War. 
 
Siquijor 
Siquijor is an island in the Philippines 32 km south of sebu. 
 
Skiddaw 
Skiddaw is a mountain in Cumbria north of Keswick. It is 931 metres tall. 
 
Skien 
Skien is a town in Norway.  
 
Skopje 
Skopje is an industrial city and the capital of Macedonia.  
 
Skye 
Skye is an island of the Hebrides.  
 
Slamat 
Slamat is a volcano in Indonesia. It is 3428 metres high. 
 
Sligo 
Sligo is a county of Connacht province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Slovakia 
Slovakia is a region of eastern Czechoslovakia. 
 
Slovenia 
Slovenia is a country in Yugolsavia.  
 
Smarden 
Smarden is a village in Kent. 
 
Snowdon 
Mount Snowdon is a 1085 metres high mountain in Wales.  
 
Sofia 
Sofia is the capital of Bulgaria since 1878.  
 
Sokal 
Sokal is a town in Ukraine. It was the scene of a battle between Russian 
cavalry and Austrian forces in august 1914.  
 
Solomon islands 
The Solomon islands are a country in the west Pacific. They have a total 
area of 28,450 km2. 
The climate is tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and weather. 
The terrain is mostly rugged mountains with some low coral atolls. 
Natural resources are fish, forests, gold, bauxite, phosphates. 
The religion is almost all at least nominally Christian; Anglican, 
Seventh-Day Adventist, and Roman Catholic Churches dominant. 
The language is 120 indigenous languages; Melanesian pidgin in much of 
the country is lingua franca; English spoken by 1-2% of population.  
 
Somalia 
Somalia is a country in north east Africa. It has a total area of 637,660 
km2. 
The climate is desert; northeast monsoon (December to February), cooler 
southwest monsoon (May to October); irregular rainfall; hot, humid 
periods (tangambili) between monsoons. 
The terrain is mostly flat to undulating plateau rising to hills in 
north. 
Natural resources are uranium, and largely unexploited reserves of iron 
ore, tin, gypsum, bauxite, copper, salt. 
The religion is almost entirely Sunni Muslim. 
The language is Somali (official); Arabic, Italian, English. 
 
Somerset 
Somerset is a county in south west England. 
 
Somme 
The Somme is a river in north France. It was the scene of a bloody battle 
in 1917.  
 
Sompting 
Sompting is a small town in Sussex, and site of one of the oldest 
churches in England.  
 
Sonning 
Sonning is a village 5 km from Reading on the River Thames in Berkshire.  
 
Soria 
Soria is the capital of Soria district in Spain. It is located on the 
River Duero. It is a medieval looking town. 
 
South Africa 
South Africa is a country in south Africa. It has a total area of 
1,221,040 km2. 
The climate is mostly semiarid; subtropical along coast; sunny days, cool 
nights. 
The terrain is vast interior plateau rimmed by rugged hills and narrow 
coastal plain. 
Natural resources are gold, chromium, antimony, coal, iron ore, 
manganese, nickel, phosphates, tin, uranium, gem diamonds, platinum, 
copper, vanadium, salt, natural gas. 
The religion is most whites and Coloreds and roughly 60% of blacks are 
Christian; roughly 60% of Indians are Hindu, 20% Muslim. 
The language is Afrikaans, English (official); many vernacular languages, 
including Zulu, Xhosa, North and South Sotho, Tswana.  
 
South America 
South America is an American continent. 
 
South Australia 
South Australia is a state in Australia.  
 
South Carolina 
South Carolina is a state in south east USA.  
 
South Dakota 
South Dakota is a state in the USA. 
 
South georgia 
South Georgia is an island south east of the Falkland Islands. 
The climate is variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year, 
interspersed with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as 
snow. 
The terrain is largely barren and has steep, glacier-covered mountains.  
 
South Glamorgan 
South Glamorgan is a county in south Wales. 
 
South Korea 
South Korea is a country in east Asia. It  has a total area of 98,480 
km2. 
The climate is temperate, with rainfall heavier in summer than winter. 
The terrain is mostly hills and mountains; wide coastal plains in west 
and south. 
Natural resources are coal, tungsten, graphite, molybdenum, lead, 
hydropower 
The religion is strong Confucian tradition; vigorous Christian minority 
(28% of the total population); Buddhism; pervasive folk religion 
(Shamanism); Chondokyo (religion of the heavenly way), eclectic religion 
with nationalist overtones founded in 19th century, claims about 1.5 
million adherents. 
The language is Korean; English widely taught in high school.  
 
South Moravia 
South Moravia is a region of Czechoslovakia.  
 
South West Africa 
South West Africa was a former name of Namibia. 
 
Southampton 
Southampton is a naval town in Hampshire, England. It is situated at the 
head of Southampton water on a peninsular between the estuaries of the 
River Test and the River Itchen. It is one of Britain's biggest container 
ports.  
 
Soweto 
Soweto is a township in South Africa. 
 
Spain 
Spain is a country in south west Europe. It has a total area of 504,750 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate 
and cloudy along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly cloudy 
and cool along coast. 
The terrain is large, flat to dissected plateau surrounded by rugged 
hills; Pyrenees in north. 
Natural resources are coal, lignite, iron ore, uranium, mercury, pyrites, 
fluorspar, gypsum, zinc, lead, tungsten, copper, kaolin, potash, 
hydropower. 
The religion is 99% Roman Catholic, 1% other sects. 
The language is Castilian Spanish; second languages include 17% Catalan, 
7% Galician, and 2% Basque. 
 
Spandau 
Spandau is a suburb of Berlin, Germany. 
 
Spanish Town 
Spanish Town is the former capital of Jamaica.*Sparta 
Sparta was a city in ancient Greece.  
 
Sparta 
Sparta was a city in ancient Greece.  
 
Spey 
The River Spey rises in the Grampian Mountains at Inverness and flows 177 
km to the Moray Firth.  
 
Spice Islands 
see "Maluku" 
 
Spitsbergen 
Spitsbergen is an island of Svalbard. 
 
Split 
Split is an Adriatic port in Yugoslavia.  
 
Spratly Islands 
The Spratly Islands are a group of 50 islands in the south China Sea. 
They have a total area of less than 5 km2. 
The climate is tropical. 
The terrain is flat. 
Natural resources are fish, guano; oil and natural gas potential.  
 
Sri Lanka 
Sri Lanka is an island country south of India. has a total area of 65,610 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; monsoonal; northeast monsoon (December to 
March); southwest monsoon (June to October). 
The terrain is mostly low, flat to rolling plain; mountains in south-
central interior. 
Natural resources are limestone, graphite, mineral sands, gems, 
phosphates, clay. 
The religion is 69% Buddhist, 15% Hindu, 8% Christian, 8% Muslim.  
The language is Sinhala (official); Sinhala and Tamil listed as national 
languages; Sinhala spoken by about 74% of population, Tamil spoken by 
about 18%; English commonly used in government and spoken by about 10% of 
the population. 
 
St Agnes 
St Agnes is a town in Cornwall, England.  
 
St Austell 
St Austell is a china clay mining town in Cornwall. 
 
St George's 
St George's is a port and the capital of Grenada. 
 
St Helena 
St Helena is an island in the south Atlantic. It has a total area of 410 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; marine; mild, tempered by trade winds. 
The terrain is rugged, volcanic; small scattered plateaus and plains. 
Natural resources are fish. The religion is Anglican majority; also 
Baptist, Seventh-Day Adventist, and Roman Catholic. 
The language is English.  
 
St Ives 
St Ives is a seaport in Cornwall. During the 19th century it was one of 
Britain's busiest pilchard ports. 
 
St John's 
St John's is the capital of Newfoundland. 
 
St Lawrence 
The St Lawrence is a river in east north America. 
 
St Moritz 
St Moritz is a winter sports centre in south east Switzerland.  
 
St Pierre and Miquelon 
St Pierre and Miquelon are a territorial collectivity of France 
comprising eight small islands off the south coast of Newfoundland, 
Canada. 
 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
St. Kitts and Nevis is the larger of the Leeward Islands in the 
Caribbean. It has a total area of 360 km2. 
The climate is subtropical tempered by constant sea breezes; little 
seasonal temperature variation; rainy season (May to November). 
The terrain is volcanic with mountainous interiors. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is Anglican, other Protestant sects, Roman Catholic. 
The language is English  
 
St. Lucia 
St. Lucia is one of the Windward Islands in the Caribbean. It has a total 
area of 620 km2. 
The climate is tropical, moderated by northeast trade winds; dry season 
from January to April, rainy season from May to August. 
The terrain is volcanic and mountainous with some broad, fertile valleys. 
Natural resources are forests, sandy beaches, minerals (pumice), mineral 
springs, geothermal potential. 
The religion is 90%  Roman Catholic, 7% Protestant, 3% Anglican. 
The language is English (official), French patois.  
 
St. Pierre and Miquelon 
St. Pierre and Miquelon are 8 small islands south of Newfoundland. They 
have a total area of 242 km2. 
The climate is cold and wet, with much mist and fog; spring and autumn 
are windy. 
The terrain is mostly barren rock. 
Natural resources are fish, deepwater ports. 
The religion is 98% Roman Catholic. 
The language is French. 
 
Stade 
Stade is a town in Saxony, Germany. 
 
Staffordshire 
Staffordshire is a county in west central England.  
 
Stalingrad 
Stalingrad was the name of the city of Volgograd from 1925 until 1961.  
 
Stanley 
Stanley is the capital of the Falkland Islands. 
 
Steep Point 
Steep Point is the westernmost extremity of Australia.  
 
Stockholm 
Stockholm is the capital of Sweden. 
 
Stone 
Stone is a village near Dartford in Kent. 
 
Stonehenge 
Stonehenge is an ancient stone circle in Wiltshire. 
 
Stopham 
Stopham is a village in Sussex at the meeting of the River Rother and 
River Arun. 
 
Stour 
The Stour is the name of several rivers in England. 
 
Strait of Dover 
The Strait of Dover is a stretch of water separating England from France 
and linking the English Channel with the North Sea.  
 
Strait of Gibraltar 
The Strait of Gibraltar is the strait separating north Africa from Spain. 
 
Strait of Messina 
The Strait of Messina is a channel in the central Mediterranean 
separating Sicily from mainland Italy.  
 
Strasbourg 
Strasbourg is a city on the River Ill, in Bas-Rhin department, France. It 
is the capital of Alsace. 
 
Stratford upon Avon 
Stratford upon Avon is a market town on the River Avon in Warwickshire, 
England. It was the birth place of William Shakespeare. 
 
Strathclyde 
Strathclyde is a region of Scotland.  
 
Strood 
Strood is a town in Kent on the Medway opposite Rochester.  
 
Stuttgart 
Stuttgart is a city in Germany. It is the capital of Baden-Wurttenberg 
region.  
 
Styria 
Styria is a province in Austria.  
 
Styx 
The styx was a river in Greek mythology surrounding the underworld. 
 
Sudan 
Sudan is a country in north east Africa. It has a total area of 2,505,810 
km2. 
The climate is tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season 
(April to October). 
The terrain is generally flat, featureless plain; mountains in east and 
west. 
Natural resources are modest reserves of crude oil, iron ore, copper, 
chromium ore, zinc, tungsten, mica, silver, crude oil. 
The religion is 70% Sunni Muslim (in north), 20% indigenous beliefs, 5% 
Christian (mostly in south and Khartoum). 
The language is Arabic (official), Nubian, Ta Bedawie, diverse dialects 
of Nilotic, Nilo-Hamitic, and Sudanic languages, English; program of 
Arabization in process. 
 
Sudbury 
Sudbury is a city in Ontario, Canada. 
 
Suez Canal 
The Suez Canal links the Mediterranean and Red seas.  
 
Suffolk 
Suffolk is a county in east England.  
 
Sulawesi 
Sulawesi is one of the Sunda islands, in Indonesia. 
 
Sumatra 
Sumatra is the 2nd largest Indonesian island. 
 
Sumbawa 
Sumbawa is an Indonesian island between Flores and Lombok. It has a wet 
climate and sparse population.  
 
Sunday Island 
Sunday Island is the largest, and only inhabited of the Kermadec Islands 
of New Zealand. It is a meteorological and radio station.  
 
Sunderland 
Sunderland is a sea port in Tyne And Wear, England at the mouth of the 
River Wear. Sunderland is an industrial town.  
 
Surabaya 
Surabaya is a port on the Island of Java. 
 
Suriname 
Suriname is a country on the north coast of South America. It has a total 
area of 163,270 km2. 
The climate is tropical; moderated by trade winds. 
The terrain is mostly rolling hills; narrow coastal plain with swamps. 
Natural resources are timber, hydropower potential, fish, shrimp, 
bauxite, iron ore, and modest amounts of nickel, copper, platinum, gold. 
The religion is 27.4% Hindu, 19.6% Muslim, 22.8% Roman Catholic, 25.2% 
Protestant (predominantly Moravian), about 5% indigenous beliefs. 
The language is Dutch (official); English widely spoken; Sranan Tongo 
(Surinamese, sometimes called Taki-Taki) is native language of Creoles 
and much of the younger population and is lingua franca among others; 
also Hindi 
Suriname Hindustani (a variant of Bhoqpuri), and Javanese. 
 
Surrey 
Surrey is a county in south England.  
 
Sussex 
Sussex is the collective term of East Sussex and West Sussex. 
 
Sutton Hoo 
Sutton Hoo is a village in Suffolk. In 1939 a a Saxon ship burial was 
discovered and excavated here.  
 
Svalbard 
Svalbard is an archipelago in the Arctic. It has a total area of 62,049 
km2. 
The climate is arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool 
summers, cold winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and north 
coasts of Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most of the year. 
The terrain is wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered; 
west coast clear of ice about half the year; fjords along west and north 
coasts. 
Natural resources are coal, copper, iron ore, phosphate, zinc, wildlife, 
fish. 
The language is Russian, Norwegian.  
 
Swale 
The river Swale is a river in North Yorkshire. It joins with the river 
Ure to form the river Ouse. It is 96km long. 
 
Swanage 
Swanage is a seaside resort town in Dorset. 
 
Swaziland 
Swaziland is a country in south east Africa. It has a total area of 
17,360 km2. 
The climate is varies from tropical to near temperate. 
The terrain is mostly mountains and hills; some moderately sloping 
plains. 
Natural resources are asbestos, coal, clay, tin, hydroelelectric power, 
forests, and small gold and diamond deposits 
The religion is 60% Christian, 40% indigenous beliefs. 
The language is English and siSwati (official); government business 
conducted in English. 
 
Sweden 
Sweden is a country in north Europe. It has a total area of 449,960 km2. 
The climate is temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool, 
partly cloudy summers; subarctic in north. 
The terrain is mostly flat or gently rolling lowlands; mountains in west. 
Natural resources are zinc, iron ore, lead, copper, silver, timber, 
uranium, hydropower potential. 
The religion is 93.5% Evangelical Lutheran, 1.0% Roman Catholic, 5.5% 
other. 
The language is Swedish, small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities; 
immigrants speak native languages.  
 
Switzerland 
Switzerland is a country in west Europe. It has a total area of 41,290 
km2. 
The climate is temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy, 
rainy/snowy winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with occasional 
showers. 
The terrain is mostly mountains (Alps in south, Jura in northwest) with a 
central plateau of rolling hills, plains, and large lakes. 
Natural resources are hydropower potential, timber, salt. 
The religion is 49% Roman Catholic, 48% Protestant, 0.3% Jewish. 
The language is distributed amongst the total population-65% German, 18% 
French, 12% Italian, 1% Romansch, 4% other; Swiss nationals-74% German, 
20% French, 4% Italian, 1% Romansch, 1% other. 
 
Sydney 
Sydney is the capital of new south Wales. 
 
Syria 
Syria is a country in west Asia. It has a total area of 185,180 km2. 
The climate is mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) 
and mild, rainy winters (December to February) along coast. 
The terrain is primarily semiarid and desert plateau; narrow coastal 
plain; mountains in west. 
Natural resources are crude oil, phosphates, chrome and manganese ores, 
asphalt, iron ore, rock salt, marble, gypsum. 
The religion is 74% Sunni Muslim; 16% Alawite, Druze, and other Muslim 
sects; 10% Christian (various sects); tiny Jewish communities in 
Damascus, Al Qamishli, and Aleppo. 
The language is Arabic (official), Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic, 
Circassian; French widely understood.  
 
Szczecin 
Szczecin is an industrial port on the River Oder, in north west Poland. 
 
Szechwan 
Szechwan is a province of China.  
 
Tadzhikistan 
Tadzhikistan is a country in south east Europe. 
 
Tahiti 
Tahiti is an island in Polynesia. 
 
Taipei 
Taipei is the capital of Taiwan.  
 
Taiwan 
Taiwan is a country in south east Asia. It has a total area of 35,980 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon 
(June to August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year. 
The terrain is eastern two-thirds mostly rugged mountains; flat to gently 
rolling plains in west. 
Natural resources are small deposits of coal, natural gas, limestone, 
marble, and asbestos. 
The religion is 93% mixture of Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist; 4.5% 
Christian; 2.5% other. 
The language is Mandarin Chinese (official); Taiwanese and Hakka dialects 
also used. 
 
Taiyuan 
Taiyuan is the capital of Shanxi. 
 
Tallinn 
Tallinn is the capital of Estonia.  
 
Tamar 
The River Tamar rises in the Devonian Hills in Devon and flows 97 km to 
the English Channel at Plymouth.  
 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu is a state in south east India.  
 
Tampa 
Tampa is a port and resort in western Florida, USA. 
 
Tampere 
Tampere is a city in south west Finland.  
 
Tana 
Tana is a lake in Ethiopia and a source of the Blue Nile. 
 
Tanganyika 
Lake Tanganyika is the deapest lake in Africa. It is situated in the 
Great Rift Valley. 
 
Tanger 
Tanger (Tangier, Tangiers) is a port in northern Morocco. 
 
Tangier 
see "Tanger" 
 
Tangiers 
see "Tanger" 
 
Tannenberg 
Tannenberg is a village in Poland (formerly in Prussia). It was the scene 
of the rout of Teutonic Knights by the Poles and Lithuanians in 1410 and 
of a heavy defeat of the Russians by the Germans in 1914.  
 
Tanta 
Tanta is a town in Egypt 88km north of Cairo. 
 
Tanzania 
Tanzania is a country in east Africa. It has a total area of 945,090 km2. 
The climate is varies from tropical along coast to temperate in 
highlands. 
The terrain is plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north, 
south. 
Natural resources are hydropower potential, tin, phosphates, iron ore, 
coal, diamonds, gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel. 
The religion is mainland - 33% Christian, 33% Muslim, 33% indigenous 
beliefs; Zanzibar - almost all Muslim. 
The language is Swahili and English (official); English primary language 
of commerce, administration, and higher education; Swahili widely 
understood and generally used for communication between ethnic groups; 
first language of most people is one of the local languages; primary 
education is generally in Swahili.  
 
Taranto 
Taranto is a naval base and port in Apulia, south east Italy. 
 
Tartary 
Tartary was a former name for the wide band of country extending through 
central Asia from the seas of Japan to the Caspian Sea.  
 
Tashkent 
Tashkent is the capital city of Uzbek.  
 
Tasmania 
Tasmania is an island south of Australia. 
 
Tatra Mountains 
The Tatra Mountains are the highest group of the Carpathians. They are 
partly in Czechoslovakia, and partly in Poland.  
 
Taunton 
Taunton is the county capital of Somerset.  
 
Tauris 
Tauris was an ancient name for the Crimea.  
 
Tavistock 
Tavistock is an industrial town in Devon. It is the scene of the Goose 
Fair held every year in October. 
 
Tay 
The River Tay rises in the Grampian mountains and flows 188 km to the 
Firth of Tay. 
 
Tayside 
Tayside is a region in Scotland.  
 
Tees 
The River Tees rises in Cumberland and flows 113 km to the North Sea. 
 
Teeside 
Teeside is an industrial area at the mouth of the River Tees, Cleveland, 
England. 
 
Tegucigalpa 
Tegucigalpa is the capital of Honduras. 
 
Tehran 
Tehran is the capital of Iran.  
 
Teifi 
The Teifi is a river in south Wales. It rises in the Cambrian mountains 
and flows south west to Cardigan Bay. It is 150km long. 
 
Tel Aviv 
Tel Aviv is a city in Isreal on the Mediterranean coast.  
 
Telepylos 
In mythology, Telepylos was the capital city of the Laestrygones. 
 
Tenerife 
Tenerife is the largest island in the Canary Islands. 
 
Tennessee 
Tennessee is a state in east central USA. 
 
Tenterden 
Tenterden is a town in Kent.  
 
Teotihuacan 
Teotihuacan is an ancient in city in central Mexico. It was the capital 
and religious centre of the Toltec civilization.  
 
Tetuan 
Tetuan is a town in Morocco where cannabis produced in the Rif is 
distributed.  
 
Texas 
Texas is a state in south USA.  
 
Thailand 
Thailand is a country in south east Asia. 
 
Thames 
The River Thames rises in the Cotswolds near Cirencester and flows 336 km 
to the North Sea. 
 
Thatcham 
Thatcham is belived to be the oldest village in Berkshire with traces of 
a settlement as far back as 6000BC.  
 
The Gaboon 
The Gaboon is a former name for the territory which is now Gabon. 
 
Thebes 
Thebes was an ancient city in Egypt on the banks of the river Nile. 
 
Thessaloniki 
Thessaloniki (Salonica) is a port in Macedonia, north east Greece.  
 
Thessaly 
Thessaly is a region of east central Greece on the Aegean.  
 
Thika 
Thika is a satellite town of Nairobi in Kenya. It is one of the biggest 
Pineapple producing areas in Kenya (owned by Del Monte mainly). 
 
Thimbu 
Thimbu is the capital of Bhutan.  
 
Thohoyandou 
Thohoyandou is the capital of Venda.  
 
Thrace 
Thrace is the ancient name of an area of south east Europe. It is now 
part of Greece. 
 
Tian Shan 
Tian Shan is a mountain system on the China border. 
 
Tianjin 
Tianjin is a port and industrial city in Hubei province, China. 
 
Tibet 
Tibet is a country in south west China. 
 
Ticino 
Ticino is a canton in Switzerland on the south slopes of the Alps and 
bordering Italy. It contains a number of tourist resorts. 
 
Tien Shan 
Tien Shan is a mountain chain in central Asia along the Chinese border. 
Translated, Tien Shan means Celestial Mountains.  
 
Tientsin 
Tientsin is a province of China.  
 
Tierra del Fuego 
Tierra del Fuego is an island group off the coast of South America 
separated from the mainland by the Strait of Magellan and Cape Horn. 
 
Tigris 
The River Tigris flows 1600km through Turkey and Iraq to the Euphrates 
above Basra. 
 
Tijuana 
Tijuana is a city and resort in north west Mexico.  
 
Timbuktu 
Timbuktu is a town in Mali. 
 
Timor 
Timor is the largest and most easterly of the Sunda islands, part of 
Indonesia. The island is divided into West Timor and East Timor. 
 
Tintagel 
Tintagel is a village in Cornwall associated with the legends of King 
Arthur. 
 
Tipperary 
Tipperary is a county of Munster province, Republic of Ireland. 
 
Tirana 
Tirana is the capital of Albania. 
 
Tiryns 
Tiryns is an ancient Greek city in the Peloponnesus on the Plain of 
Argos.  
 
Titicaca 
Lake Titicaca is the largest lake in South America. It is located in the 
Andes between Bolivia and Peru.  
 
Titograd 
Titograd is the capital of Montenegro, Yugoslavia.  
 
Tobago 
Tobago is an island in the Caribbean. 
 
Tobruk 
Tobruk is a port in Libya.  
 
Togo 
Togo is a country in west Africa. It has a total area of 56,790 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north. 
The terrain is gently rolling savanna in north; central hills; southern 
plateau; low coastal plain with extensive lagoons and marshes. 
Natural resources are phosphates, limestone, marble. 
The religion is about 70% indigenous beliefs, 20% Christian, 10% Muslim. 
The language is French, both official and language of commerce; major 
African languages are Ewe and Mina in the south and Dagomba and Kabye in 
the north.  
 
Tokyo 
Tokyo is the capital of Japan.  
 
Toledo 
Toledo is a city on the River Tagus in central Spain. 
 
Tolpuddle 
Tolpuddle is a small village in Dorset. 
 
Tombstone 
Tombstone is a former silver-mining town in the desert of south east 
Arizona. 
 
Tonbridge 
Tonbridge is an ancient town in Kent on the River Medway. 
 
Tonga 
Tonga is a country in the south west Pacific. It has a total area of 748 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December 
to May), cool season (May to December). 
The terrain is most islands have limestone base formed from uplifted 
coral formation; others have limestone overlying volcanic base. 
Natural resources are fish, fertile soil. 
The religion is Christian; Free Wesleyan Church claims over 30,000 
adherents. 
The language is Tongan, English. 
 
Torgau 
Torgau is a town in the Leipzig district of Germany.  
 
Toronto 
Toronto is the capital of Ontario.  
 
Torquay 
Torquay is a seaside resort town in Devon. Until 1790 it was a quiet 
fishing village, then during the Napoleonic wars it hosted the wives of 
Naval officers who were based on ships anchored at Torbay. From the 
middle of the 19th century it became a popular seaside resort. 
 
Toulon 
Toulon is a port and the capital of Var department, south east France. It 
stands on the Mediterranean coast 48km south east of Marseilles.  
 
Toulouse 
Toulouse is the capital of Haute-Garonne department, southern France. 
 
Towy 
The Towy River rises in the hills between Cardigan and Radnor in Wales 
and flows 106 km to Carmarthen Bay.  
 
Trabzon 
Trabzon is a sea port on the Black Sea in east Turkey. It boasts the best 
football team in Turkey.  
 
Transkei 
Transkei is the largest Bantu homeland in South Africa. 
 
Transvaal 
The Transvaal is a province in north east South Africa. 
 
Transylvania 
Transylvania is a mountainous area in north west and central Romania. 
 
Trent 
see "River_Trent" 
 
Trentino-Alto Adige 
Trentino-Alto Adige is an autonomous region of northern Italy.  
 
Trieste 
Trieste is a port on the Adriatic, opposite Venice, in Italy. 
 
Tring 
Tring is a market town in Hertfordshire, 14km north west of Hemel 
Hempstead.  
 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Trinidad and Tobago is a country in the Caribbean. It has a total area of 
5,130 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (June to December). 
The terrain is mostly plains with some hills and low mountains. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, asphalt. 
The religion is 36.2% Roman Catholic, 23.0% Hindu, 13.1% Protestant, 6.0% 
Muslim, 21.7% unknown. 
The language is English (official), Hindi, French, Spanish.  
 
Tripoli 
Tripoli is the capital of Libya.  
 
Tripura 
Tripura is a state in north east India. 
 
Tristan da Cunha 
Tristan da Cunha is a group of islands in the south Atlantic comprising 
part of the British dependancy of St Helena.  
 
Trowbridge 
Trowbridge is a town in Wiltshire. In the 16th century is had an 
extensive cloth industry. Today it is the administrative centre of 
Wiltshire.  
 
Troy 
Troy was a city in Asia minor that was the scene of the Trojan war. 
 
Troyes 
Troyes is the capital of Aube department in north east France. It stands 
on the River Seine.  
 
Trujillo 
Trujillo is a city in north west Peru.  
 
Truro 
Truro is a city in Cornwall on the Fal estuary. During the middle ages 
Truro was an important port for the transportation of mineral ores. Today 
it is primarily a market town. 
 
Tubarao 
Tubarao is a coal-mining town in south Brazil on the east coast.  
 
Tubuai 
Tubuai is an archipelago in French Polynesia, in the south Pacific Ocean. 
 
Tudela 
Tudela is a market town in northern Spain.  
 
Tula 
Tula is the capital of Tula oblast in Russia. 
 
Tulsa 
Tulsa is an important petroleum producing town in Oklahoma. It was 
founded in 1880. 
 
Tummel 
see "River_Tummel" 
 
Tunbridge Wells 
Tunbridge Wells is a royal town in Kent, England. 
 
Tundra 
A tundra is a region of high latitude almost devoid of trees resulting 
from the presence of permafrost. 
 
Tungurahua 
Tungurahua is a volcano in Ecuador. It is 5033 metres high. 
 
Tunis 
Tunis is the capital of Tunisia.  
 
Tunisia 
Tunisia is a country in north Africa. 
 
Tunja 
Tunja is the capital of Boyaca department, Colombia.  
 
Turin 
Turin is the capital of Piedmont in north west Italy. 
 
Turkana 
Lake Turkana is a lake in the Great Rift Valley, mainly in Kenya but the 
northern end is in Ethiopia. 
 
Turkey 
Turkey is a country partly in Europe and partly in Asia. It has a total 
area of 780,580 km2. 
The climate is temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters; 
harsher in interior. 
The terrain is mostly mountains; narrow coastal plain; high central 
plateau (Anatolia) 
Natural resources are antimony, coal, chromium, mercury, copper, borate, 
sulphur, iron ore. 
The religion is 98% Muslim (mostly Sunni), 2% other (mostly Christian and 
Jewish). 
The language is Turkish (official), Kurdish, Arabic. 
 
Turkmenistan 
Turkmenistan is a constituent republic in Asia. 
 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
The Turks and Caicos Islands are islands in the Caribbean. They have a 
total area of 430 km2. 
The climate is tropical; marine; moderated by trade winds; sunny and 
relatively dry. 
The terrain is low, flat limestone; extensive marshes and mangrove 
swamps. 
Natural resources are spiny lobster, conch. 
The religion is Anglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Methodist, Church of 
God, Seventh-Day Adventist. 
The language is English (official). 
 
Tuscany 
Tuscany is a region of central Italy. 
 
Tuva 
Tuva was a part of Mongolia until 1911, it is now an autonomous republic 
in Asia. 
 
Tuvalu 
Tuvalu is a country in the south west Pacific.  
 
Tweed 
The River Tweed rises in the Tweedsmuir Hills and flows 156 km to the 
North Sea at the Scottish and England border. 
 
Tyne 
The River Tyne rises in Northumberland and flows 72 km to the North Sea 
at Tynemouth. 
 
Tyne and Wear 
Tyne and Wear is a metropolitan county in north east England. 
 
Tyrone 
Tyrone is a county of Northern Ireland. 
 
Tyrrhenian Sea 
The Tyrrhenian Sea is part of the Mediterranean between Italy and 
Corsica, Sardinia and Sicily. 
 
Ubangi 
The River Ubangi is a major river in central Africa. It is a tributary of 
the River Zaire. It rises on the border of the Central African Republic 
and Zaire and flows west and south 2240km to the River Zaire at Irebu.  
 
Ubangi-Shari 
Ubangi-Shari is a former name of the Central African Republic.  
 
Udmurt 
Udmurt is an autonomous republic in the foothills of the Urals. 
 
Uganda 
Uganda is a country in east Africa. It has a total area of 236,040 km2. 
The climate is tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December 
to February, June to August); semiarid in northeast. 
The terrain is mostly plateau with rim of mountains. 
Natural resources are copper, cobalt, limestone, salt. 
The religion is 33% Roman Catholic, 33% Protestant, 16% Muslim, rest 
indigenous beliefs. 
The language is English (official); Luganda and Swahili widely used; 
other Bantu and Nilotic languages. 
 
Uist 
The Noth Uist and South Uist islands are 2 of the outer Hebrides off the 
north west coast of Scotland.  
 
Uitenhage 
Uitenhage is a summer resort town in Cape province, South Africa. 
 
Ukraine 
Ukraine is a country in east Europe.  
 
Ulaan Baataar 
Ulaan Baataar (formerly Ulan Bator) is the capital of Mongolia. 
 
Ulan Bator 
see "Ulaan_Baataar" 
 
Ulster 
Ulster was a kingdom in northern Ireland. It was annexed by England in 
1461.  
 
Ume 
The Ume is a river in Sweden. It flows to the gulf of Bothnia. It is 400 
km long. 
 
Umea 
Umea is the capital of Vasterbotten province in north east Sweden. It 
stands at the mouth of the Ume river on the gulf of Bothnia.  
 
Umm al Qaiwain 
Umm al Qaiwain is one of the United Arab Emirates. 
 
Umtata 
Umtata is the capital of Transkei, South Africa.  
 
Uncia 
Uncia is a tin mining town in Oruro department, Bolivia.  
 
United Arab Emirates 
The United Arab Emirates is a country in Arabia. It has a total area of 
83,600 km2. 
The climate is desert; cooler in eastern mountains. 
The terrain is flat, barren coastal plain merging into rolling sand dunes 
of vast desert wasteland; mountains in east. 
Natural resources are crude oil and natural gas. 
The religion is 96% Muslim (16% Shia); 4% Christian, Hindu, and other. 
The language is Arabic (official); Farsi and English widely spoken in 
major cities; Hindi, Urdu. 
 
United States of America 
see "USA" 
 
Unye 
Unye is a modern coastal town on the Black Sea in north Turkey. 
 
Upnor 
Upnor is a resort town on the River Medway in Kent. 
 
Upper Volta 
Upper Volta is a former name of Burkina Faso. 
 
Ural 
see "ural_mountains" 
 
Ure 
The River Ure is a river in North Yorkshire. It flows east and south east 
to join with the River Swale to form the River Ouse. It is 80km long. 
 
Uruguay 
Uruguay is a country in South America. It has a total area of 176,220 
km2. 
The climate is warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown. 
The terrain is mostly rolling plains and low hills; fertile coastal 
lowland. 
Natural resources are soil, hydropower potential, minor minerals. 
The religion is 66% Roman Catholic, 2% Protestant, 2% Jewish, 30% 
nonprofessing or other. 
The language is Spanish. 
 
Uruguay River 
The Uruguay River rises in south Brazil and flows 1360 km to Rio de la 
Plata. 
 
Urumqi 
Urumqi is an industrial city, and the capital of Xinjiang Uygur region, 
China.  
 
USA 
The USA is country in north America. It has a total area of 9,372,610 
km2. 
The climate is mostly temperate, but varies from tropical (Hawaii) to 
arctic (Alaska); arid to semiarid in west with occasional warm, dry 
chinook wind. 
The terrain is vast central plain, mountains in west, hills and low 
mountains in east; rugged mountains and broad river valleys in Alaska; 
rugged, volcanic topography in Hawaii. 
Natural resources are coal, copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates, 
uranium, bauxite, gold, iron, mercury, nickel, potash, silver, tungsten, 
zinc, crude oil, natural gas, timber. 
The religion is Protestant 61% (Baptist 21%, Methodist 12%, Lutheran 8%, 
Presbyterian 4%, Episcopalian 3%, other Protestant 13%), Roman Catholic 
25%, Jewish 2%, other 5%; none 7%. 
The language is predominantly English; sizable Spanish-speaking minority. 
 
Ushuala 
Ushuala is a free port and naval base at the tip of Tierra del Fuego, 
Argentina.  
 
Utah 
Utah is a state in west USA.  
 
Utrecht 
Utrecht is an industrial city and the capital of Utrecht province in the 
central Netherlands. It stands on the Kromme Rijn, 35 km south east of 
Amsterdam.  
 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh is a state in north India.  
 
Uzbekistan 
Uzbekistan is a country in Asia.  
 
Vaduz 
Vaduz is the capital of Liechtenstein.  
 
Valencia 
Valencia is an industrial city and the capital of Valencia region, 
eastern Spain. 
 
Valladolid 
Valladolid is an industrial town and the capital of Valladolid region, 
Spain. 
 
Valle d'Aosta 
Valle d'Aosta is an autonomous region in north west Italy.  
 
Valletta 
Valletta is the capital of Malta. 
 
Valverde 
Valverde is the capital of Ferro island.  
 
Van 
Van is a city on the shores of Lake Van in Turkey.  
 
Van Diemen's Land 
Van Diemen's Land is a former name for Tasmania.  
 
Vancouver 
Vancouver is an industrial city and port. It is Canada's main Pacific 
port. 
 
Vancouver Island 
Vancouver Island is an island off the west coast of Canada. 
 
Vanuatu 
Vanuatu is a country and group of islands in the south Pacific. It has a 
total area of 14,760 km2. 
The climate is tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds. 
The terrain is mostly mountains of volcanic origin; narrow coastal 
plains. 
Natural resources are manganese, hardwood forests, fish. 
The religion is nominally Christian. 
The language is English and French (official); pidgin (known as Bislama 
or Bichelama). 
 
Varanasi 
Varanasi is a Hindu holy city in Uttar Pradesh, on the Ganges.  
 
Varna 
Varna is a port on an inlest of the Black Sea in Bulgaria.  
 
Vatican City 
The Vatican City is a country within Rome. It has a total area of 0.438 
km2. 
The climate is temperate; mild, rainy winters (September to mid-May) with 
hot, dry summers (May to September) 
The terrain is low hill. 
It has no natural resources. 
The religion is Roman Catholic. 
The language is Italian, Latin, and various other languages. 
 
Venda 
Venda is a black national state near the Zimbabwe border, in South 
Africa.  
 
Veneto 
Veneto is a region in north east Italy. 
 
Venezuela 
Venezuela is a country in South America. It has a total area of 912,050 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands. 
The terrain is Andes mountains and Maracaibo lowlands in northwest; 
central plains (llanos); Guyana highlands in southeast. 
Natural resources are crude oil, natural gas, iron ore, gold, bauxite, 
other minerals, hydropower, diamonds. 
The religion is 96% nominally Roman Catholic, 2% Protestant. 
The language is Spanish (official); Indian dialects spoken by about 
200,000 Amerindians in the remote interior. 
 
Venice 
Venice is a city, port and naval base on the Adriatic coast in Italy. 
 
Verdun 
Verdun is a fortress town on the Meuse in north east France.  
 
Vermont 
Vermont is a state in USA.  
 
Versailles 
Versailles is the capital city of Les Yvelines department, in north 
France. 
 
Vesuvius 
Vesuvius is an active volcano south east of Naples, Italy.  
 
Vichy 
Vichy is a health resort town on the river Allier, in Allier department, 
France.  
 
Victoria 
Victoria is a state in Australia. 
Victoria is a port and the capital of the Seychelles on Mahe island.  
 
Victoria (Port) 
Victoria is the main port and harbour between Hong Kong and Kowloon.  
 
Victoria (State) 
Victoria is a state in Australia. 
 
Victoria Falls 
The Victoria Falls is a waterfall on the Zambezi river on the border 
bwteen Zambia and Zimbabwe.  
 
Vienna 
Vienna is the capital of Austria. 
 
Vientiane 
Vientiane is the capital and chief port of Laos on the Mekong river.  
 
Vietnam 
Vietnam is a country in south east Asia. It has a total area of 329,560 
km2. 
The climate is tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy 
season (mid-May to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October to 
mid-March). 
The terrain is low, flat delta in south and north; central highlands; 
hilly, mountainous in far north and northwest. 
Natural resources are phosphates, coal, manganese, bauxite, chromate, 
offshore oil deposits, forests. 
The religion is Buddhist, Confucian, Taoist, Roman Catholic, indigenous 
beliefs, Islamic, Protestant. 
The language is Vietnamese (official), French, Chinese, English, Khmer, 
tribal languages (Mon-Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian). 
 
Villahermosa 
Villahermosa is the capital of Tabasco region in south east Mexico. It is 
an agricultural market town with rich local petroleum deposits. 
 
Villarrica 
Villarrica is a town in south east Paraguay.  
 
Villaviencio 
Villaviencio is a town on the foothills of the Andes in east Colombia.  
 
Vilnius 
Vilnius is the capital of Lithuania.  
 
Vilyui 
The River Vilyui flows east from Siberia into the Lena River. 
 
Virgin islands 
The virgin islands are 100 islands in the caribbean. They have a total 
area of 352 km2. 
The climate is subtropical, tempered by easterly tradewinds, relatively 
low humidity, little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season May to 
November. 
The terrain is mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level 
land. 
Natural resources are tourism. 
The religion is 42% Baptist, 34% Roman Catholic, 17% Episcopalian, 7% 
other. 
The language is English (official), but Spanish and Creole are widely 
spoken.  
 
Virginia 
Virginia is a state in south USA. 
 
Virginia Water 
Virginia Water is a park in Surrey. It was founded in 1746 by the Duke of 
Cumberland. 
 
Visby 
Visby is the capital of Gotland.  
 
Vladivostok 
Vladivostok is a port on the Amur Bay on the Pacific coast. 
 
Volga 
The Volga is the longest river in Europe. It rises in the Valdai plateau 
and flows 3540 km to the Caspian Sea.  
 
Volgograd 
Volgograd is an industrial city on the River Volga in south west Russia. 
It was formerly called Tsaritsyn and then Stalingrad.  
 
Volta 
The Volta is the main river in Ghana. 
 
Wake Island 
Wake Island is a coral atoll in the Pacific Ocean. Iy has a total area of 
6.5 km2. 
The climate is tropical. 
The terrain is an atoll of three coral islands built up on an underwater 
volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim; 
average elevation less than four meters. 
It has no natural resources. 
 
Wakhan Salient 
The Wakhan Salient is a narrow strip of Afghanistan bordering Russia, 
China and Pakistan. 
 
Wales 
Wales is a principality west of England.  
 
Wall Street 
Wall Street is a street in Manhattan, New York where the USA stock 
exchange is located. 
 
Wallingford 
Wallingford is a town in Berkshire. It is situated at a ford over the 
River Thames. 
 
Wallis and Futuna 
Wallis and Futuna is an island in the south Pacific Ocean. It has a total 
area of 274 km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April); cool, dry 
season (May to October). 
The terrain is volcanic origin; low hills. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is largely Roman Catholic. 
The language is French, Wallisian (indigenous Polynesian language).  
 
Wantage 
Wantage is a market town in Berkshire.  
 
Wardour 
Wardour castle is a castle in Wiltshire. It was built in 1392 on the 
authority of Ricard II. During the civil war it was twice beseiged. In 
1643, with Lord Arundell away, his wife Blanche with the help of 25 
fighting men held out against a patliamentary army of 1300 men, only 
surrendering when mines were used. 
 
Wareham 
Wareham is a town in Dorset.  
 
Warfield 
Warfield is a village in Berkshire. It is the site of one of the few 
ancient clearings of Windsor Forest. 
 
Warlingham 
Warlingham is a town in Surrey. 
 
Warsaw 
Warsaw is the capital of Poland.  
 
Warwickshire 
Warwickshire is a county in central England.  
 
Washington 
Washington is a state in north west USA.  
 
Washington DC 
Washington DC is the capital of the USA.  
 
Waterford 
Waterford is a county of Munster province, Republic of Ireland. 
 
Waterloo 
Waterloo is a village in Belgium that was the scene of a battle in 1815 
when the British commander wellington defeated the French emperor 
napoleon. 
 
Wealden 
Wealden is a district of East Sussex stretching from Uckfield to the 
South Coast. 
 
Wear 
The Wear is a river in England. It rises in the Pennines and flows 
through Durham to the North Sea at Sunderland. It is 96km long.  
 
Weddell Sea 
The Weddell Sea is an arm of the south Atlantic south east of Cape Horn.  
 
Wei 
The Wei is a river in Shaanxi province, west China. It rises in the 
highlands of Kansu and flows east to the Yellow River.  
 
Wellington 
Wellington is the capital of New Zealand. It is in north island.  
 
Wells 
Wells is a cheese producing city in Somerset. 
 
West Bank 
The West Bank is an autonomous region of Israel. It has a total area of 
5,860 km2. 
The climate is temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with 
altitude, warm to hot summers, cool to mild winters. 
The terrain is mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in west, 
but barren in east. 
Natural resources are negligible. 
The religion is 80% Muslim (predominantly Sunni), 12% Jewish, 8% 
Christian and other. 
The language is Arabic, Israeli settlers speak Hebrew, English widely 
understood. 
 
West Bengal 
West Bengal is a state in north east India. 
 
West Glamorgan 
West Glamorgan is a county in south west Wales. 
 
West Ham 
West Ham is an area of East London bordered by the river Thames and river 
Lea.  
 
West Malling 
West Malling is a town in Kent. It became prominent when an abbey was 
established during Norman times.  
 
West Midlands 
The West Midlands is a metropolitan county in central England.  
 
West Sussex 
West Sussex is a county in south east England.  
 
West virginia 
West VIrginia is a state in east USA. 
 
West Yorkshire 
West Yorkshire is a metropolitan county in north east England.  
 
Westdean 
Westdean is a hamlet in the Friston Forest in Sussex. 
 
Westerham 
Westerham is a village in Kent. 
 
Western Australia 
Western Australia is a state in Australia.  
 
Western Sahara 
The Western Sahara is a country in north Africa. It has a total area of 
266,000 km2. 
The climate is hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore currents 
produce fog and heavy dew. 
The terrain is mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy 
surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast. 
Natural resources are phosphates, iron ore. 
The religion is Muslim. 
The language is Hassaniya Arabic, Moroccan Arabic.  
 
Western Samoa 
Western Samoa is a country in the Pacific Ocean It has a total area of 
2,860 km2. 
The climate is tropical; rainy season (October to March), dry season (May 
to October). 
The terrain is narrow coastal plain with volcanic, rocky, rugged 
mountains in interior. 
Natural resources are hardwood forests, fish. 
The religion is 99.7% Christian (about half of population associated with 
the London Missionary Society; includes Congregational, Roman Catholic, 
Methodist, Latter Day Saints, Seventh-Day Adventist). 
The language is Samoan (Polynesian), English.  
 
Westmeath 
Westmeath is a county of Leinster province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Weston-Super-Mare 
Weston-Super-Mare is a large seaside resort town in Somerset. 
 
Wexford 
Wexford is a county of Leinster province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Wey 
The river Wey rises in west Weald and flows north through Hampshire and 
Surrey into the river Thames near Weybridge. It is 56km long. 
 
Weybridge 
Weybridge is an old town in Surrey on the River Wey.  
 
Weymouth 
Weymouth is a popular seaside resort and seaport in Dorset. The world's 
first bathing machine was used at Weymouth in 1763. 
 
White Russia 
White Russia is another name for Belorussia.  
 
Whitehall 
Whitehall is a street in London where many of the government buildings 
are situated.  
 
Whitstable 
Whitstable is a seaside resort in north Kent. 
 
Wicklow 
Wicklow is a county of Leinster province, Republic of Ireland.  
 
Wiltshire 
Wiltshire is a county in south west England.  
 
Wimbledon 
Wimbledon is a town in Greater London. It is home to a tennis tournament. 
 
Winchester 
Winchester is a city in Hampshire. It was the Anglo-Saxon capital of 
England. 
 
Windermere 
Windermere is the largest English lake. It is in Cumbria and supplies 
water to Manchester.  
 
Windhoek 
Windhoek is the capital of Namibia. 
 
Windsor 
Windsor is a town in Berkshire 32km west of London. It is on the river 
Thames.  
 
Windward Islands 
The Windward Islands is a name for the West Indies. 
 
Winnipeg 
Winnipeg is the capital of Manitoba, Canada. Lake Winnipeg is a lake 64km 
north of Winnipeg the city in Manitoba. It contains several large 
islands.  
 
Winsford 
Winsford is a town in Cheshire. 
 
Wirral 
The Wirral is a peninne metropolitan district of Merseyside.  
 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin is a state in north USA.  
 
Wivenhoe 
Wivenhoe is a town in Essex, England on the river Colne.  
 
Woking 
Woking is a town in Surrey. The old town dates back to Anglo-Saxon times, 
but modern Woking developed with the railway in the late 1830s. 
 
Wokingham 
Wokingham is a market town in Berkshire close to Windsor Forest.  
 
Wolverhampton 
Wolverhampton is an industrial town in the West Midlands, England.  
 
Wookey Hole 
Wookey Hole is one of the most extensive cave networks in Britian. It is 
located in the southern slopes of the Mendips in Somerset. 
 
Worcestershire 
Worcestershire was a county in central England until 1974 when it merged 
with Herefordshire to form Hereford and Worcester. 
 
Worms 
Worms is an industrial town on the Rhine in Germany.  
 
Worthing 
Worthing is a seaside resort in Sussex noted for its sea fishing. 
 
Wroclaw 
Wroclaw is an industrial river port on the Oder, in Poland. 
 
Wuhan 
Wuhan is a river port and the capital of Hubei province, China. 
 
Wye 
The River Wye rises in Plynlimmon and flows 209 km to the Severn near 
Chepstow. 
 
Wyoming 
Wyoming is a state in west USA. 
 
Xanthi 
Xanthi is a town in Thrace, Greece. It stands on the river Mesta and is 
the centre of a tobacco growing area. 
 
Xi Jiang 
Xi Jiang (formerly Si-Kang) is a river which rises in Yunnan, China and 
flows 1900 km to the South China Sea. 
 
Xi'an 
Xi'an is the capital of Shaanxi.  
 
Xining 
Xining is the capital of Qinghai. 
 
Yakut 
Yakut is an autonomous republic in Asia.  
 
Yakutsk 
Yakutsk is the capital of Yakut.  
 
Yalta 
Yalta is a seaport in southern Ukraine. In 1945 it hosted a conderence 
between Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin. 
 
Yamoussoukro 
Yamoussoukro is the capital of Ivory Coast. 
 
Yangtze Kiang 
Yangtze Kiang is the former name of the Chang Jian River. 
 
Yaounde 
Yaounde is the capital of Cameroon. 
 
Yare 
The Yare is a river in Norfolk, England. It flows to the North Sea at 
Gorleston. It is 80km long. 
 
Yarmouth 
Yarmouth is an historic sea port on the Isle of Wight.  
 
Yedo 
Yedo was the name of Tokyo, Japan until 1868. 
 
Yellow River 
The Yellow River rises in Kunlun Shan in China and flows into Bo Hai. It 
is 4640km long.  
 
Yellow Sea 
The Yellow Sea is the gulf of the Pacific between China and Korea.  
 
Yellowknife 
Yellowknife is the capital of the Northwest Territories.  
 
Yemen 
Yemen is 2 countries, in Arabia. 
The Yemen Arab Republic has a total area of 195,000 km2. 
The climate is desert; hot and humid along coast; temperate in central 
mountains; harsh desert in east. 
The terrain is narrow coastal plain (Tihama); western mountains; flat 
dissected plain in center sloping into desert interior of Arabian 
Peninsula. 
Natural resources are crude oil, rock salt, marble; small deposits of 
coal, nickel, and copper; fertile soil. 
The religion is 100% Muslim (Sunni and Shia) 
The language is Arabic. 
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen has a total area of 332,970 km2. 
The climate is desert; extraordinarily hot and dry. 
The terrain is mostly upland desert plains; narrow, flat, sandy coastal 
plain backed by flat-topped hills and rugged mountains. 
Natural resources are fish, oil, minerals (gold, copper, lead). 
The religion is Sunni Muslim, some Christian and Hindu. 
The language is Arabic.    
 
Yenisei 
The Yenisei River rises in Tuva and flows 4100 km across Siberia to the 
Arctic Ocean. 
 
Yeovil 
Yeovil is an industrial town in Somerset. 
 
Yerevan 
Yerevan is the capital of Armenia.  
 
Yinchuan 
Yinchuan is the capital of Ningxia Hui, in north west China.  
 
Yokohama 
Yokohama is a port on Tokyo Bay, Japan. 
 
York 
York is a city in north east England. 
 
Yorkshire 
Yorkshire is a county in north east England.  
 
Ypres 
Ypres is a town in Belgium that was the scene of a battle in world war 1. 
 
Yucatan 
Yucatan is a peninsular inc Central America divided between Mexico, 
Belize and Guatemala. 
 
Yugolsavia 
Yugolsavia is a country in south east Europe. It is currently in turmoil 
due to civil war, and may spilt into separate countries. It has a total 
area of 255,800 km2. 
The climate is temperate; hot, relatively dry summers with mild, rainy 
winters along coast; warm summer with cold winters inland. 
The terrain is mostly mountains with large areas of karst topography; 
plain in north. 
Natural resources are coal, copper, bauxite, timber, iron ore, antimony, 
chromium, lead, zinc, asbestos, mercury, crude oil, natural gas, nickel, 
uranium. 
The religion is 50% Eastern Orthodox, 30% Roman Catholic, 9% Muslim, 1% 
Protestant, 10% other. 
The language is Serbo-Croatian, Slovene, Macedonian (all official); 
Albanian, Hungarian.  
 
Yukon 
The Yukon is a territory in north west Canada. The Yukon river flows 3185 
km to the Bering Sea. 
 
Yunnan 
Yunnan is a province of China.  
 
Zagreb 
Zagreb is the capital of Croatia. 
 
Zaire 
Zaire is a country in central Africa. It has a total area of 2,345,410 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; hot and humid in equatorial river basin; cooler 
and drier in southern highlands; cooler and wetter in eastern highlands; 
north of Equator - wet season April to October, dry season December to 
February; south of 
Equator - wet season November to March, dry season April to October. 
The terrain is vast central basin is a low-lying plateau; mountains in 
east. 
Natural resources are cobalt, copper, cadmium, crude oil, industrial and 
gem diamonds, gold, silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium, uranium, 
radium, bauxite, iron ore, coal, hydropower potential. 
The religion is 50% Roman Catholic, 20% Protestant, 10% Kimbanguist, 10% 
Muslim, 10% other syncretic sects and traditional beliefs. 
The language is French (official), Lingala, Swahili, Kingwana, Kikongo 
and Tshiluba.  
 
Zambia 
Zambia is a country in central Africa. It has a total area of 752,610 
km2. 
The climate is tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to 
April). 
The terrain is mostly high plateau with some hills and mountains. 
Natural resources are copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, coal, emeralds, gold, 
silver, uranium, hydropower potential. 
The religion is 50-75% Christian, 1% Muslim and Hindu, and the remainder 
indigenous beliefs. 
The language is English (official) and about 70 indigenous languages.  
 
Zanzibar 
Zanzibar is an island within Tanzania.  
 
Zaragoza 
Zaragoza is the Spanish name for Saragossa. 
 
Zeebrugge 
Zeebrugge is a ferry port on the North Sea coast in Belgium.  
 
Zenith 
The zenith is the highest point in the heavens above an observers head. 
Opposite to the nadir.  
 
Zhejiang 
Zheijang is a province in south east China. 
 
Zimbabwe 
Zimbabwe is a country in central Africa. It has a total area of 390,580 
km2. 
The climate is tropical and moderated by altitude with a rainy season 
from November to March. 
The terrain is mostly high plateau with higher central plateau (high 
veld); mountains in east. 
Natural resources are coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel, copper, 
iron ore, vanadium, lithium, tin. 
The religion is 50% syncretic (part Christian, part indigenous beliefs), 
25% Christian, 24% indigenous beliefs, and a few Muslim. 
The language is English (official); Shona and Ndebele.  
 
Zurich 
Zurich is an industrial and financial city in Zurich canton, Switzerland 
on Lake Zurich.  
  
  
FAMOUS PEOPLE  
  
 
Aaron 
Aaron was the brother of Moses. 
 
Ababdeh 
The Ababdeh were (are?) a nomadic African tribe inhabiting Egypt between 
the Nile and the Red Sea.  
 
Abbess 
An Abbess is the female superior of a community of nuns.  
 
Abbot 
An abbot is the superior of a community of monks. 
 
Abelard 
Pierre Abelard was a French philosopher. He was born in 1079, dying in 
1142. He founded scholastic theology.  
 
Aborigine 
An aborigine is a member of an indigenous people. 
 
Absalom 
Absalom was the third and favourite son of David. He was killed leading a 
rebellion against his father. 
 
Accadians 
The Accadians were the primitive inhabitants of Babylonia described in 
the cuneiform inscriptions.  
 
Accountant 
An accountant is someone who keeps accounts.  
 
Achaeans 
The Achaeans were one of the four races into which the ancient Greeks 
were divided. 
 
Acheson 
Edward Goodrich Acheson was an American Inventor. He was born in 1856, 
dying in 1931. He invented carborundrum and artificially prepared 
graphite.  
 
Acrobat 
An acrobat is someone who performs daring gymnastics. 
 
Acton 
John Emerich Edward Dalberg Acton was a British historian. He was born at 
Naples in 1834 and died in 1902.  
 
Actor 
An actor is a dramatic performer. One who performs in plays.  
 
Adalbert 
Saint Adalbert was a missionary in north Germany and Poland. He was born 
in 955, dying in 997. He was martyred in Bremen. 
 
Adam 
Robert Adam was a Scottish architect and designer. He was born in 1728 
and died in 1792. He was responsible for the Adelphi.  
 
Addison 
Joseph Addison was an English essayist and poet. He was born in 1672, 
dying in 1719. He was co-author of the spectator. 
 
Adept 
An adept is someone who is proficient at some thing.  
 
Adler 
Alfred Adler was an Austrian psychologist. He was born in 1870, dying in 
1937. He put forward the the theory of the inferiority complex.  
 
Admiral 
Admiral is a rank in the navy.  
 
Aedh 
Aedh was King of Scotland from 877 to 878.  
 
Aesop 
Aesop was the author of fables about animals. He lived around 620 - 560 
BC. 
 
Afghan 
An Afghan is an inhabitant of Afghanistan.  
 
African 
An African is an inhabitant of Africa.  
 
Aga 
The Aga was the title of the leader of the Ottoman empire.  
 
Agnes 
Agnes is the patron saint of virgins. 
 
Ainos 
The Ainos were the aboriginal inhabitants of Japan. They were a short 
race, averaging about 5 feet in height with black hair and typicaly hairy 
bodies. As recently as 1900 they inhabited the island of Yesso. 
 
Akkas 
The Akkas are a dwarfish race found in Central Africa. They average 4.5 
feet in height with brown skin, large heads and a projecting jaw. They 
are a hunting race, renowned for their skill with a bow and arrow. 
 
Alamanni 
Luigi Alamanni was an Italian poet. He was born in 1495 at Florence and 
died in 1556. 
 
Alani 
The Alani (Alans) were a warlike tribe which migrated from Asia westwards 
at the time of the decline of the Roman empire. During the 5th century 
they merged with the Vandals.  
 
Alans 
see "Alani" 
 
Alaric II 
Alaric II was King of the Visigoths from 484 until 507 when he was killed 
at the battle of Poictiers by the army of the Franks. 
 
Albani 
Francesco Albani was an Italian painter. He was born in 1578 at Bologna 
and died in 1660. 
 
Alboin 
Alboin was King of the Lombards from 561. He died in 573 when he was 
assassinated at the orders of his wife Rosamond. 
 
Albrechtsberger 
Johann Georg Albrechtsberger was a German composer. He was born in 1736 
and died in 1809. he taught Beethoven and Moscheles amongst others. 
 
Albret 
Jeanne D'Albret was Queen of Navarre and wife of Antoine de Bourbon. She 
was born in 1528 and died due to poisoning in 1572.  
 
Albuquerque 
Affonso de Albuquerque was a Portugese admiral. He was born in 1452 and 
died in 1515. He was viceroy of Portugese West Africa in 1503.  
 
Alcaeus 
Alcaeus was a son of Perseus and Andromeda. 
 
Aldhelm 
Saint Aldhelm was born in 640 and died in 709. He was abbot of Malmsebury 
and later the bishop of Sherborne. He was an architect and poet.  
 
Aldington 
Richard Aldington was an English writer and poet. He was born in 1892 and 
died in 1962. He was born in Hampshire. He wrote a controversial 
biography of Lawrence of Arabia. 
 
Ale'Gria 
Ciro Ale'Gria was a Peruvian novelist. He was born in 1900 and died in 
1967. He was imprisoned and fled to Chile where he lived in exile. 
 
Alessandro Scarlatti 
Alessandro Scarlatti was an Italian composer. He was born in 1659 and 
died in 1725. He founded modern Italian Opera.  
 
Alexander 
Alexander was King of Scotland from 1107 to 1124. 
 
Alexander II 
Alexander II was King of Scotland from 1214 to 1249.  
 
Alexander III 
Alexander III was King of Scotland from 1249 to 1286. 
 
Alexandra 
Queen Alexandra was the daughter of Christian IX of Denmark. She was born 
in 1844, dying in 1925. She married Edward VII in 1863 when he was the 
prince of Wales. 
 
Alfred 
Alfred was King of the west Saxons and King of England from 871 to 901. 
 
Algonkins 
The Algonkins are a family of North American Indians, they consisted of 
four groups: The Eastern group comprising the Massachusetts, 
Narragansets, Mohicans, Delewares and others; North Eastern group; 
Western group comprising the Miamis, Illinis and others; North Western 
group including the Ojibbewas. 
 
Ali Bey 
Ali Bey was a ruler of Egypt. He was born in 1728 in the Caucasus and 
died in 1773. He was taken to Egypt and sold as a slave, but became 
virtual governor of Egypt.  
 
Ali Pasha 
Ali Pasha was an Albanian chief. He was born in 1741 and died in 1822.  
 
Alibert 
Jean Louis Baron Alibert was a French physician. He was born in 1766 and 
died in 1837. He was chief physician at the Hospital St. Louis.  
 
Alison 
Archibald Alison was a Scottish theologian and writer on aesthetics. He 
was born in 1757 in Edinburgh and died in 1839. 
 
Allende 
Salvador Allende was a radical Chilean marxist democrat leader who became 
president in 1970, but was killed in a military coup in 1973. 
 
Amundsen 
Roald Amundsen was a Norwegian explorer. First to reach south pole. 
 
Anacreon 
Anacreon was a Greek lyric poet. He was born in 569BC and died in 475BC 
 
Anaxagoras 
Anaxagoras was an Ionian philosopher. He went to Athens in 464BC and 
inspired Pericles and Euripides with his love of science. He was born in 
488BC and died in 428BC.  
 
Anderson 
Gerry Anderson is a highly innovative creator of children's science 
fiction adventure television programmes. His creations of Thunderbirds, 
Joe-90, and Stingray are legendary. More recently he created "Space 
Precinct" probably one of the most expensive television cereals yet 
produced costing over 1 million pounds per episode to produce.  
 
Andrea Del Sarto 
Andrea Del Sarto was a Florentine artist born in 1487, he died in 1531. 
He was a pupil of Piero di Cosimo and influenced by Leonardo da Vinci and 
Michelangelo. 
 
Andromeda 
Andromeda was a daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopea. Perseus found her 
bound to a rock as a sacrifice to a sea monster. Perseus rescued her 
after killing the sea monster so that she might become his wife.  
 
Angelico 
Fra Angelico was an Itailian painter. He was born in 1387 and died in 
1455. He especially painted religious frescoes. 
 
Anne 
Anne was Queen of England from 1702 to 1714. She was born in 1665 and 
died in 1714. She was a daughter of James II. 
 
Anouilh 
Jean Anouilh was a French dramatist. He was born in 1910 and died in 
1987.  
 
Apache 
The apache are a tribe of Indians that live in Arizona. 
 
Apuleius 
Lucius Apuleius was a Roman lawyer, philosopher and author. He lived 
around 160.  
 
Arab 
The Arabs are a Semitic race of people who originally inhabited Saudi 
Arabia and the neighboyring countries.  
 
Arabs 
see "Ara" 
 
Archimedes 
Archimedes was a great ancient Greek mathematician. 
 
Aristotle 
Aristotle was an ancient Greek philosopher. 
 
Armstrong 
Neil Armstrong was the first man to step onto the moon in 1969. 
 
Arnold Bennett 
Arnold Bennett was a British novelist. He was born at Hanley in 
Staffordshire in 1867, and died in 1931.  
 
Arthur 
King Arthur was the son of Uther Pendragon and ruled Britain around the 
5th century.  
 
Asoka 
Asoka was an Indian emperor and upholder of Buddhism. He was born in 
269BC and died in 232BC. 
 
Asser 
Asser was a welsh monk who lived during the 9th century and is credited 
with writing about the life of King Alfred. 
 
Astaire 
Fred Astaire was the adopted name of Frederick Austerlitz, an American 
actor, singer and dancer. He was born in Omaha, Nebraska in 1899 and died 
in 1987. 
He starred in numerous films, including Top Hat, Easter Parade, and Funny 
Face, 
many of the films contain inventive dance sequences which he designed and 
choreographed himself. He made ten classic films with the most popular of 
his 
dancing partners, Ginger Rogers. He later played straight dramatic roles 
in such films as On the Beach. 
 
Athelstan 
Athelstan succeeded Edward as King of England from 924 to 940.  
 
Attila 
Attila was King of the Huns. He was born in 406, dying in 453.  
 
Aurangzeb 
Aurangzeb was a Mogul emperor of India. He was born in 1618 and died in 
1707. 
 
Austen 
Jane austen was an English author. She was born in Hampshire in 1775. She 
died in 1817. 
 
Aztec 
The Aztecs were an American Indian tribe inhabiting Mexico. 
 
Babbage 
Charles Babbage was a British mathematician. He designed an analytical 
engine which was the forerunner of th modern computer. He was born in 
1801 and died in 1871. 
 
Baber 
Baber was the founder of the Mogul dynasty which ruled northern India for 
300 years. He was born in 1483, dying in 1530.  
 
Babi 
The Babi are a Persian religious sect formed in 1843 by Bab Ed Din. 
 
Bach 
Johann Sebastian Bach was a German composer. He was born at Eisenach in 
1685. He died in 1750.  
 
Bacon 
Francis Bacon was an English philosopher. He was born in 1561 and died in 
1626. 
Roger Bacon was the founder of English philosophy. He was born in 1220, 
dying in 1294. In 1257 he became a fanciscan friar. 
 
Baden-Powell 
Baden-Powell was a British soldier. He was born in 1857. He died in 1941. 
He was the founder of the scouting movement.  
 
Baggara 
The Baggara are a Muslim Bedouin people of the Nile Basin.  
 
Baird 
John Logie Baird was a Scottish scientist. He pioneered television. He 
was born in 1888, dying in 1946. 
 
Baker 
A baker is a person who manufacturers bread.  
 
Baldwin 
Stanley Baldwin was an English statesman. He was born in 1867, dying in 
1947. He was prime minister three times.  
 
Banks 
Sir Joseph Banks was a British botanist who accompanied Captain Cook on 
his first voyage and was mainly responsible for the colonization of 
Australia. He was born in 1743 and died in 1820. Nathaniel Prentiss Banks 
was an American politician and soldier. He defended Washingston from 
Jackson's army in 1862. He was born in 1816 and died in 1894.  Thomas 
Banks was an English sculptor. He was born in 1735 and died in 1805. He 
made the monument to Dr. Watts in Westminster Abbey. 
 
Banshee 
A banshee is a fairy who forewarns of death by wailing. 
 
Barbour 
John Barbour was the father of Scottish poetry. He was born in 1316 and 
died in 1395. 
 
Barbusse 
Henri Barbusse was a French writer. He was born in 1874 and died in 1935. 
 
Bard 
A bard was a celtic poet. 
 
Barents 
Willem Barents was a Dutch navigator who discovered Spitzbergen on his 
third voyage to find a north east passage to Asia in 1594. He died in 
1597.  
 
Baring-Gould 
Sabine Baring-Gould was an English author or numerous hymns and novels. 
He was born in 1834 and died in 1924. 
 
Barlow 
Jane Barlow was an Irish novelist. She was born in 1860 and died in 1917. 
Her works are renowned for their depiction of the Irish peasantry.  
 
Barnum 
Phineas Taylor Barnum was an American showman who launched the enterprise 
known as "the greatest show on earth". He was born in 1810 and died in 
1891.  
 
Barrantes 
Vicente Barrantes was a Spanish publicist and author. He was born in 1829 
and died in 1898. 
 
Barratt 
Reginald Barratt was an English watercolour artist famous for his 
perfection of draughtmanship. He was born in 1861 and died in 1917. 
 
Barrett 
Sir William Fletcher Barrett was a British scientist. He was the 
principal founder of the Society for Psychical Research. He was born in 
1844 and died in 1925. 
 
Barrington 
George Barrington was an Irish pick-pocket and author. He was deported to 
Botany Bay. He was born in 1755 and died in 1840. He wrote the line "we 
left our country for our country's good". 
Samuel Barrington was a British admiral who gained distinction during the 
Seven Years War. He was born in 1729 and died in 1800.  
 
Barry 
Sir John Wolfe Barry was a civil engineer who built Tower Bridge. He was 
born in 1836 and died in 1918. 
 
Bartok 
Bela Bartok was a Hungarian composer. He was born in 1881, dying in 1945. 
 
Bastien-Lepage 
Jules Bastien-Lepage was a French painter. He was born in 1848 and died 
in 1884. His works include Sarah Bernhardt and Joan of Arc listening to 
the voices. 
 
Batak 
The Batak are a number of distinct but related peoples of northern 
Sumatra in Indonesia.  
 
Beaker People 
The Beaker People were people of Iberian origin who spread out over 
Europe in the 2nd millenium BC. They are belived to have built Stonehenge 
in England. They are called the Beaker People because their remains 
include earthenware beakers.  
 
Beardsley 
Aubrey Vincent Beardsley was a black-and-white decorative artist. He was 
born in 1872 and died in 1898. 
 
Beethoven 
Beethoven was a German composer.  
 
Bell 
Alexander Graham Bell was a Scottish inventor. He was born in Edinburgh 
in 1847 and died in 1922. He invented the telephone whilst working at a 
school for teachers of the deaf in Boston.  
 
Belloc 
Hilaire Belloc was a French author born in 1870. In 1902 he became a 
British subject. He died in 1953.  
 
Bemba 
The Bemba are an African people of northern Zambia. 
 
Benet 
Stephen Vincent Benet was an American writer. He was born in 1898 and 
died in 1943. He wrote the poem John Brown's Body which deals with the 
American Civil War.  
 
Benn 
Anthony Wedgwood Benn is a British labour MP. He was born in 1925. He is 
son of the 1st viscount of Stansgate. He was the 1st person to disclaim 
his title under the Peerage Act. 
 
Berber 
The berbers are a race of people in north Africa. 
 
Berthelot 
Marcellin Pierre Eugene Berthelot was a French chemist and politician. He 
was born in 1827, dying in 1907. He was the first person to produce 
organic compounds synthetically.  
 
Berzelius 
Jons Jakob Berzelius was a Swedish chemist. He was born in 1779, dying in 
1848. He was the founder of electrochemical theory and designed the 
system of chemical symbols still in use.  
 
Bessemer 
Sir Henry Bessemer was born in 1813, dying in 1898. He invented the 
bessemer Converter which is a three stage process for maKing cheap steel. 
 
Best 
Charles Herbert was a Canadian physiologist. He was born in 1899, dying 
in 1978. With Banting he discovered the use of insulin in treating 
diabetes.  
 
Betjeman 
Sir John Betjeman was an English poet. He was born in 1906, dying in 
1984. He was the poet laureate from 1972 to 1984.  
 
Bevan 
Aneurin bevan was a British socialist politician. He was born in 1897, 
dying in 1960. He devised the national health service which came into 
operation in 1948. 
 
Beveridge 
William Henry Beveridge was the first baron beveridge. He was born in 
1879, dying in 1963. He was an economist who designed the present British 
social Security service.  
 
Bevin 
Ernest bevin was an British trade unionist. He was born in 1881, dying in 
1951. He was foreign secretary from 1945 to 1951. 
 
Bhave 
Vinova Bhave is an Indian reformer and leader of the sarvodaya movement. 
He was born in 1895. He was a follower of ghandi and campaigned for help 
for landless peasants.  
 
Bichat 
Marie Francois Xavier Bichat was a French physiologist. He was born in 
1771 and died in 1802. He studied tissue and formed the basis of modern 
histology. 
 
Biddle 
John Biddle was an English unitarian. He was born in 1615, dying in 
prison in 1662. He was imprisoned for his controversial writings. 
 
Binyon 
Laurence Binyon was a poet, art critic and orientalist. He was born in 
1869, dying in 1943. He worked at the British museum fvrom 1893 to 1933. 
 
Birch 
Samuel John Lamorna Birch was an English lanscape painter. He was born in 
1869, dying in 1955.  
 
Birkbeck 
George Birkbeck founded the mechanics' institutes. He was born in 1776, 
dying in 1841.  
 
Bishop 
Sir Henry Rowley Bishop was an English composer. He was born in 1786, 
dying in 1855. He wrote home sweet home.  
 
Bismarck 
Otto Eduard Leopold Von Bismarck was a pRussian diplomat and statesman. 
He was born in 1815, dying in 1898. He was the main architect of the 
German empire. 
 
Bismark 
Otto bismark was Prussian prime minister in 1862, and chancellor of 
Germany in 1867. He became the first chancellor of the German empire in 
1871. 
 
Bizet 
Bizet was a French composer born in paris in 1838. He died in 1875. 
 
Black 
Sir James Black is a British scientist. He was born in 1924. He was 
awarded a nobel prize for medicine in 1988 for his work on drugs which 
prevent heart attacks. 
 
Black Baron 
Black Baron was the alias of one Christopher Pile, an English man, who in 
the mid-1990's wrote a series of computer viruses employing an advanced 
polymorphic technique he called "SMEG". In all three variants of SMEG 
were developed and distributed; Pathogen, Queeg and Smeg 3. 
 
Blackfeet 
The blackfeet are a north American Indian tribe.  
 
Blackwell 
Elizabeth Blackwell was the first woman to obtain an MD degree. She was 
born in 1821 in England. She graduated from the College of Geneva in New 
York in 1849.  
 
Blackwood 
William Blackwood was a Scottish publisher. He was born in 1776 in 
Edinburgh and died in 1834. He started publishing "Blackwood's Magazine" 
in 1817.  
 
Blake 
William Blake was an English poet and artist. He was born in London in 
1757. He died in 1827. 
 
Blane 
Sir Gilbert Blane was a Scottish physician. He was born in 1749 in 
Ayrshire and died in 1834. He was private physician to Admiral Rodney, 
and then physician to the fleet in the West Indies, in which position he 
introduced the use of lime-juice and other means of preventing scurvy 
among sailors. He wrote "Elements of Medical Logic". 
 
Blanqui 
Jerome Adolphe Blanqui was a French economist. He was born in 1798 at 
Nice and died in 1854 in Paris. He was introduced to economics while 
studying medicine at Paris. He favoured a free-trade policy and wrote a 
number of works including "Precis Elementaire d'Economie Politique". 
 
Blasius 
St. Blasius was Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia. He was said to have been 
martyred around 316 by torture with a wool-comb, from which he became the 
patron saint of wool-combers.  
 
Bleriot 
Louis Bleriot made the first crossing of the English channel in an 
aircraft. The aircraft was his monoplane. The crossing took place on july 
25th 1909. 
 
Blicher 
Steen Stensen Blicher was a Danish poet and novelist. He was born in 1782 
and died in 1848. His novels give an accurate account of country life in 
Jutland in the middle of the 19th century. 
 
Bligh 
William Bligh was the commander of the ship "Bounty" when the crew 
mutinied in the South Seas. He was born in 1753 in Plymouth and died in 
1817 in London. The mutiny occured while the Bounty was on course for 
Jamaica. Bligh and 18 men were cast adrift in a boat not far from Tonga. 
After a journey of 4000 miles they reached Timor and made it back to 
England. The mutineers sailed to Pitcairn Island where their ancestors 
still live. 
 
Bloch 
Marcus Eliezer Bloch was a naturalist. He was born in 1723 at Anspach and 
died in 1799. His main work was on fish, and he wrote "Natural History Of 
Fishes" in 1785 which included 432 colour plates. 
 
Bloemaart 
Abraham Bloemaart was a Dutch painter. He was born in 1565 and died in 
1657.  
 
Blondel 
Blondel was a French minstrel and poet of the 12th century. He is a 
legendary character, tales about him being recorded in "Chronicles of 
Rheims". One story tells how his master was taken prisoner, and Blondel 
trying to find him walked all Palestine and Germany singing his master's 
favourite song until at last the song was taken up and answered by the 
imprisoned master.  
 
Blue-stocking 
A Blue-stocking was a litterary lady. The term was applied around the 
time of Dr Johnson when ladies would hold conversation with distinguised 
literary men. One of the men, Benjamin Stillingfleet, always wore blue 
stockings and his conversation was so prized at the meetings that in his 
absence the ladies would remark, "we can do nothing without the blue-
stockings", and hence the meetings became known as blue-stocking clubs, 
and the ladies who attended them as blue-stockings. 
 
Boers 
The boers were early Dutch colonists in South Africa. 
 
Bogos 
The Bogos are a Hamitic people of Northern Syria. 
 
Boiars 
The boiars were an order of the Russian aristocracy next in rank to the 
ruling Princes. The order was abolished by Peter the Great. 
 
Bonnard 
Pierre Bonnard was a French painter famous for painting nudes. He was 
born in fontenay-aux-roses in 1867. He died in 1947.  
 
Bonzes 
Bonzes was the name used by Europeans for Buddist priests around 1900.  
 
Borgia 
Lucretia Borgia was the daughter of Pope Alexander VI. She was born in 
1480 and died in 1523. 
 
Borrow 
George Borrow was an English writer. He was born in 1803 and died in 
1881. he wrote the Dictionary of the Gypsy Language in 1874. 
 
Boscan-Almogaver 
Juan Boscan-Almogaver was a Spanish poet. He was born in the late 15th 
century and died in 1540. He introduced Italian forms into Spanish 
poetry. 
 
Boscovich 
Roger Joseph Boscovich was an Italian astronomer and geometrician. He was 
born in 1711 at Ragusa and died in 1787 in Milan. 
 
Bosworth 
Joseph Bosworth was an English philologist. He was born in 1790 in 
derbyshire and died in 1876. He studied the Anglo-Saxon language and 
wrote several works on it including "Anglo-Saxon Grammar" and "Dictionary 
of the Anglo-Saxon Labguage". 
 
Bottiger 
Karl August Bottiger was a German archaeologist. He was born in 1760 and 
died in 1835. In 1814 he was appointed chief inspector of the museum of 
Antiquities in Dresden.  
 
Bottomley 
Horatio Bottomley was an English politician and financier. He was born in 
1860, dying in 1933. He was imprisoned for fraud. 
 
Boucicault 
Dion Boucicault was an Irish author and actor. He was born in 1822 at 
Dublin and died in 1890.  
 
Boulton 
Matthew Boulton was an English mechanical engineer. He was born in 1728 
at Birmingham and died in 1809. In 1769 he formed a partnership with 
James Watt.  
 
Bowdich 
Thomas Edward Bowdich was an African explorer. He was born in 1790 and 
died in 1824 of disease in the Gambia. 
 
Bowdoin 
James Bowdoin was an American statesman. He was born in 1727 at Boston 
and died in 1790. In 1785 he was appointed govenor of Massachusetts. 
 
Bower 
Archibald Bower was a Scottish writer. He was born in 1686 and died in 
1766. He wrote "A History of The Popes" which was remarkable for its zeal 
against the Popery.  
 
Bowker 
Sir Reginald James Bowker was a British statesman. He was born in 1901. 
He was ambassador to Burma from 1948 to 1950, ambassador to Turkey from 
1954 to 1958 and ambassador to Austria from 1958 to 1961. 
 
Bowles 
William Lisle Bowles was an English poet. He was born in 1762 at King's 
Sutton and died in 1850.  
 
Bowman 
Sir William Bowman was an English anatomist and surgeon. He was born in 
1816 and died in 1892. He collaborated with Todd in writing "The 
Physiological Anatomy".  
 
Bowyer 
William Bowyer was an English printer. He was born in 1699 in London and 
died in 1777. In 1729 he became printer of the votes of the House Of 
Commons. In 1767 he was nominated printer of the journals of the House of 
Lords.  
 
Brindley 
James Brindley was an English engineer. He was born in 1716 and died in 
1772. He built the Bridgewater Canal in 1758 and the Grand Trunk Canal. 
 
Bromius 
Bromius was another name for Dionysus.  
 
Bruce Smith 
Bruce Smith is drum player with the rock group Public Image Ltd.  
 
Burke 
Clement Burke was premier drummer with the 70's punk band Blondie. He 
also provided backing vocals for many tracks. 
 
Bushman 
The bushman are an aboriginal people living in south Africa.  
 
Byrd 
Richard Evelyn Byrd was an American scientist and explorer. He started 
his career in the navy, but took up flying. In 1926 he flew over the 
North Pole. He was born in 1888 and died in 1957. William Byrd was an 
English composer. He was born in 1543 and died in 1623. 
 
Byron 
Lord George Gordon Byron was an English poet. He was born in 1788 and 
died in 1824. 
 
Cabot 
John Cabot was an Italian navigator. He was born in Genoa in 1450 and 
died in 1498. He discovered Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. 
 
Caligula 
Caligula was a Roman Emperor, alleged to be mad he was assassinated by a 
guard. 
 
Caliph 
Caliph is the title of the civic and religious leader of Islam. 
 
Calvin 
John Calvin was a Swiss religious reformer. He was born in 1509 and died 
in 1564. He was influenced by Martin Luther. 
 
Campbell 
Sir Malcolm Campbell was a British racing motorist. He set land speed 
records and speed-boat speed records. He was born in 1885 and died in 
1949. Donald Campbell was the son of Malcolm Campbell. He broke the world 
water speed record on Ullswater in 1955. He was born in 1921 and died in 
1967.  
 
Camus 
Albert Camus was a French writer. He was born in 1913 and died in 1959. 
 
Canaletto 
Antonio Canaletto was an Italian painter. He was born at Venice in 1697 
and died in 1768. He painted scenes.  
 
Canute 
King canute ruled England from 1016 to 1035.  
 
Captain 
Captain is a rank in the armed services.  
 
Carnegie 
Andrew Carnegie was an American industrialist and philanthropist. He was 
born at Dunfermline in 1835 and died in 1919.  
 
Carroll 
Lewis Carroll was the pen-name of Charles Dodgson. He was a writer of 
poetry and children's books. He was born in 1832 and died in 1898.  
 
Carthusians 
The Carthusians were a religious order instituted by St. Bruno in 1084. 
 
Cartwright 
Edmund Cartwright was an English cleric and inventor. He was born in 1743 
at Marnham and died in 1823. He invented a mechanical weaving machine.  
 
Catullus 
Gaius Valerius Catullus was a Roman lyric poet. He was born at verona in 
84BC and died in 54BC. 
 
Cavell 
Edith Louisa Cavell was an English nurse who helped allied soldiers to 
escape from occupied territory during the Great War. She was caught and 
shot by the Germans. She was born in 1865 in Norfolk and died in 1915. 
 
Cavendish 
Henry Cavendish was an English scientist who investigated the nature of 
gases. He was born in 1731, dying in 1810.  
 
Caxton 
William Caxton was the first English printer. He was born in 1422 and 
died in 1491. He established a press in Westminster in 1477 and from 
there he issued about 80 books.  
 
Cecilia 
Saint Cecilia was a Christian martyr. She died in 230. She is associated 
with church music. 
 
Celaeno 
Celaeno was one of the harpies. 
 
Cellini 
Benvenuto Cellini was a Florentine goldsmith and sculptor. He was born in 
1500 and died in 1571.  
 
Celsius 
Anders Celsius was a Swedish astronomer. He was born in 1701 and died in 
1744. He invented the centigrade scale for measuring temperature.  
 
Celts 
The Celts were tribes which came to Britain from central Europe in the 
late Bronze age and again in the Iron Age. 
 
Centurion 
A centurion was an officer in the Roman army commanding 100 men.  
 
Cepheus 
Cepheus was the King of aethiopia. He displeased poseidon by having a 
beautiful daughter, andromeda. Poseidon then sent floods and a sea 
monster to terrorise the area until Cepheus gave his daughter as a 
sacrifice to the sea monster. 
 
Cervantes 
Saavedra Miguel de Cervantes was a Spanish writer. He was born in 1547 at 
Acala de Henares and died in 1616. He was the author of the book Don 
Quixote de la Mancha.  
 
Cezanne 
Paul Cezanne was a French painter. He was born in 1839 at Aix-en-
Provence. He studied with Picasso. 
 
Chagall 
Marc Chagall was a Russian painter. He was born in 1887 at Vitebsk. 
 
Chamberlain 
Sir Austen Chamberlain was a British politician. He was born in 1863 at 
Birmingham and he died in 1937. He initiated the Locarno pact in 1925 
which sought to reconcile France and Germany. Neville Chamberlain was a 
British politician. He was born in 1869 and died in 1940. He became Prime 
Minister in 1937. 
 
Champollion 
Jean Francis Champollion was a French scholar. He was born in 1790 and 
died in 1832. He deciphered Egyptian hieroglyphic writing from studing 
the Rosetta Stone.  
 
Chancellor 
The Chancellor of the Exchequer is a cabinet minister who looks after the 
nation's money. It is the oldest office in the British Government, dating 
back to the days of Henry I when the Chancellor sat at a table covered 
with a chequered cloth and received taxes collected by the sheriffs. 
 
Chardin 
Jean Baptiste Simeon Chardin was a French painter. He was born in 1699 
and died in 1779. He painted still lifes and interior scenes.  
 
Charlemagne 
Charlemagne (Charles the Great) was king of France. He was born in 742 
and died in 814. He extended the French empire into Italy. 
 
Charles I 
Charles I was King of England from 1625 to 1649. He was born in 1600 
and died in 1649.  
 
Charles II 
Charles II was King of England from 1660 to 1685. 
 
Chateaubriand 
Francois Rene Vicomte de Chateaubriand was a politician and pioneer of 
the French Romantic Movement. He was born in 1768 and died in 1848. He 
was ambassador to Britain in 1822 and minister of Foreign Affairs from 
1823 until 1824. 
 
Chatterton 
Thomas Chatterton was an English poet. He was born in 1752 and died in 
1770.  
 
Chaucer 
Geoffrey Chaucer was an English poet. He was born in 1340 and died in 
1400. His works include the Canterbury Tales. 
 
Chekhov 
Anton Pavlovich Chekhov was a Russian writer born at Taganrog in 1860. He 
died in 1904. 
 
Cherokee 
The Cherokee are a north American Indian tribe. 
 
Chesterton 
Gilbert Keith Chesterton was an English author of essays, verse and 
novels. He was born in 1874 and died in 1936. 
 
Chiang Kai-Shek 
Chiang Kai-Shek was a Chinese political and military leader. He served 
with Sun Yat-Sen during the 1911 revolution and later became leader of 
the nationalist government. He opposed the communists and fled to Taiwan 
in 1950. 
 
Chippendale 
Thomas Chippendale was one of England's most famous furniture makers. He 
was born in 1718 in Yorkshire and died in 1779.  
 
Chopin 
Frederic Francois Chopin was a Polish composer. He was born in 1810 
near Warsaw and died in 1849. He spent much of his life in Paris where 
he founded the modern style of piano playing.  
 
Churchill 
Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill was a Britsh statesman. He was born 
in 1874 at Blenheim Palace and died in 1965. He was Britains Prime 
Minister during the Second World War.  
 
Cicero 
Marcus Tullius Cicero was a Roman orator, politician and writer. He was 
born in 106BC and died in 43BC. 
 
Cimabue 
Cimabue was an Italian painter. He was born in 1240 and died in 1302. 
 
Claude Lorraine 
Claude Lorraine was a French landscape painter. He was born in 1600 at 
Lorraine and died in 1682. 
 
Claudius I 
Claudius I was born in 10BC at Lyons and died in 54. He became emperor 
following the assassination of Caligula. He was murdered by his wife 
Agrippina so that her son, Nero could be emperor. 
 
Clemenceau 
Georges Clemenceau was a French republican and statesman. He was born in 
1841 at Mouilleron-en-Pareds and died in 1929. He was Prime Minister of 
France in 1906 and inaugurated a scheme of social reform.  
 
Cleopatra 
Cleopatra was a name of Egyptian queens. Cleopatra VI was a lover of 
caesar and following his murder mark Antony. She commited suicide in 31bc  
 
Clerk of the Peace 
A Clerk of the Peace is a county lawyer who gives advice to the Justices 
of the Peace and keeps records of his county.  
 
Clive 
Robert Clive was the principal founder of the British Empire in India. He 
is also known as Clive of India. He was born in 1725 at Market Drayton 
and died in 1774. As a child he formed a protection racket and demanded 
money from the local shop keepers! 
 
Clovis 
Clovis was King of the Franks. He was born in 465 and died in 511. He 
defeated the Gallo-Romans near Soissons and the Alemanni near Cologne in 
496. 
 
Cobb 
John Rhodes Cobb was a British racing motorist. He established the world 
record of 394.2mph at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah in September 1947. 
 
Cobett 
William Cobett was a British author and journalist. He was born in 1763 
at Surrey and died in 1835. 
 
Cocteau 
Jean Cocteau was a French actor, poet, film director and play wright. He 
wrote the book Les Enfants Terribles. He was born in 1891 and died in 
1963.  
 
Coleridge 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge was an English poet. He was born in 1772 and died 
in 1834. He is best remembered for his poem the Ancient Mariner.  
 
Colin 
Colin was King of Scotland from 967 to 971. 
 
Collins 
William Wilkie Collins was an English novelist. He was born in 1824 and 
died in 1889. William Collins was an English landscape painter. 
 
Colt 
Samuel colt of hartford, conneticut patented the first successful 
percussion revolver in England in 1835 and in America in 1836.  
 
Columbus 
Christopher Columbus was an Italian navigator. He was born in 1451 at 
Genoa and died in 1506. Inspired by the adventures of Marco Polo, 
Columbus sought a westerly route to the East. He discovered Cuba, the 
West Indies and the South American mainland.  
 
Comenius 
Johann Amos Comenius was a Czech educational reformer. He was born in 
1592 at Moravia and died in 1671. He advised throughout Europe on the 
teaching of languages, suggesting that they should be taught by 
conversation and that pictures helped.  
 
Conductor 
In music, a conductor is a musician who directs the performance of a 
piece of music.  
 
Confucius 
Confucius was an ancient chinese philosopher. 
 
Congreve 
William Congreve was an English playwright. He was born in 1670 at Leeds 
and died in 1729. He was educated in Ireland. He went to London when he 
was in his early twenties. He wrote comedy plays.  
 
Conolly 
John Conolly was an English physician. He was born in 1794 in 
Lincolnshire and died in 1866. He introduced a new form of treatment for 
the mentally ill, whereby mechanical restraints were no longer used. 
 
Conon 
Conon was an Athenian general. He commanded the fleet of 413BC which was 
intended to prevent the Corinthians from relieving Syracuse during their 
war with Athens.  
 
Conrad 
Joseph Conrad was a British novelist. He was born in 1857 in the Ukraine 
and died in 1924. He spent twenty years at sea and then settled in Kent 
to work as a writer. 
 
Conrad I 
Conrad I was King of Germany in 911. He was killed in 918 while fighting 
the Hungarians.  
 
Conrad II 
Conrad II was King of Germany from 1024 until 1039. He tried to reform 
the country, repressing some of the more unpleasant aspects of the feudal 
system.  
 
Conrad III 
Conrad III was King of Germany from 1138 to 1152. He adopted the double 
headed eagle symbol which is still in use in Austria today. 
 
Conscience 
Hendrik Conscience was a Flemish novelist. He was born in 1812 at Antwerp 
and died in 1883. He wrote novels mainly dealing with the history of his 
country and provide accounts of everyday life in Belgium.  
 
Constable 
John Constable was an English landscape painter. He was born in 1776 at 
Suffolk and died in 1837. 
 
Constantine 
Constantine was King of Scotland from 863 to 877. Constantine The Great 
was a Roman emperor. He was born in 274, dying in 337. He was converted 
to christianity and made it the state religion. 
 
Constantine II 
Constantine II was King of Scotland from 900 to 943.  
 
Constantine III 
Constantine III was King of Scotland from 995 to 997. 
 
Consul 
A consul is an official who who looks after the trading interests of his 
country in foreign towns.  
 
Contras 
The contras are a right wing Nicaraguan guerrilla force.  
 
Cook 
Captain James Cook was an English sailor and explorer. In 1768 he sailed 
around the world. He discovered easter island in 1772. 
 
Cooper 
Sir Astley Paston Cooper was an English surgeon and the author of medical 
text books. He was born in 1768, dying in 1841. 
James Fenimore Cooper was an American novelist. He was born in 1789, 
dying in 1851. He wrote the last of rthe Mohicans and the Deerslayer. 
Anthony Ashley Cooper was an English philanthropist. He was born in 1801 
and died in 1885. 
 
Copernicus 
Nicholas Copernicus was the founder of astronomy. He was born in 1478 at 
torun in poland. He died in 1543. He studied at cracow university and 
settled in frauenburg in 1512. He put forward the theory that the planets 
revolve around the sun.  
 
Coppee 
Francois Joachim Coppee was a French poet,novelist and dramatist. He was 
born in 1842, dying in 1908. 
 
Corelli 
Arcangelo Corelli was an Italian composer. He was born in 1653, dying in 
1713.  
 
Corneille 
Pierre Corneille was a French dramatist. He was born in 1606, dying in 
1684. He was a master of the classical tragedy.  
 
Cornwallis 
Charles Cornwallis was the 1st marquess of cornwallis. He was born in 
1738, dying in 1805. He commanded the British forces which surrendered to 
the Americans at yorktown in 1781 and ended the American war of 
independance. 
 
Cornwell 
see "Le_Carre" 
 
Coroner 
A Coroner is a person who is appointed to enquire into the death of 
somebody who has died, or is thought to have died from unnatural causes.  
 
Corot 
Jean Baptiste Corot was a French landscape painter. He was born in 1796, 
dying in 1875. 
 
Correggio 
Antonio Allegri da Correggio was an Italian painter. He was born in 1494 
at correggio. He died in 1534. He painted the ecce homo. 
 
Cortes 
Hernando Cortes was a Spanish adventurer. He was born in 1488, dying in 
1547. He captured mexico for spain, and destroyed the ancient 
civilisation there. 
 
Coulomb 
Charles Coulomb was a French physicist. He was born in 1736 and died in 
1806. He studied the distribution of electrical charges. The unit of 
electrical charge, the coulomb, is named after him.  
 
Coulton 
George Gordon Coulton was an English cholar and historian. He was born in 
1858, dying in 1947. He wrote the book five centuries of religion.  
 
Couperin 
Francois Couperin was a French composer. He was born in 1668 near Paris 
and died in 1733. 
 
Courbet 
Gustave Courbet was a French painter. He was born in 1819 at Ornans and 
died in 1877. 
 
Cousin 
Victor Cousin was a French educationalist and philosopher. He was born in 
1792, dying in 1867. He founded the eclectic school.  
 
Cousteau 
Jacques-Yves Cousteau is a French underwater explorer. He was born in 
1910. He has pioneered aqualung diving and made numerous television 
documentaries.  
 
Coverdale 
Miles Coverdale was an English bishop. He was born in 1488 at Yorkshire, 
dying in 1568. He translated the bible in 1535.  
 
Coward 
Noel Coward was an English actor, playwright and composer. He was born in 
1899. 
 
Cowper 
William Cowper was an English poet. He was born in 1731 and died in 1800. 
 
Cox 
David Cox was an English landscape painter. He was born in 1783, dying in 
1859. 
 
Crabbe 
George Crabbe was an English poet. He was born in 1754, dying in 1832.  
 
Cranach 
Lucas Cranach was a German painter. He was born in 1472 at Kronach and 
died in 1553.  
 
Cranmer 
Thomas Cranmer was archbishop of canterbury under Henry VIII. He was born 
in 1489, dying in 1556 when he was burnt at the stake for refusing to 
revert his religion under Mary. 
 
Cripps 
Sir Stafford Cripps was a British labour mp. He was born in 1889, dying 
in 1952. He was chancellor of the exchequer in post-war Britain.  
 
Crispin 
Saint Crispin is the patron saint of shoe-makers. 
 
Crome 
John Crome was an English landscape painter. He was born in 1599 at 
Norwich and died in 1821. 
 
Crompton 
Samuel Crompton was an English inventor born in 1753 he died in 1827. He 
invented the spinning-mule in 1779.  
 
Cromwell 
Oliver Cromwell was protector of the commonwealth of England, Scotland 
and Ireland. He was born at huntingdon in 1599, dying in 1658. During the 
English civil war he first served under the earl of Essex before 
reorganising the parliamentary army. He promoted the trial and execution 
of Charles I.  
 
Crookes 
Sir William Crookes was an English physicist. He was born in 1832, dying 
in 1919. He discovered the element thallium in 1861. He invented the 
crookes  tube in 1874.  
 
Cruikshank 
George Cruikshank was an English artist. He was born in 1792 at London 
and died in 1878. He is remembered for his caricatures and book 
illustrations. 
 
Culpeper 
Nicholas Culpeper was a 17th century English medical writer and 
astrologer. 
 
Cummings 
Edward Estlin Cummings was an American writer and painter. He was born in 
1894 and died in 1962.  
 
Cunard 
Sir Samuel Cunard was the founder of the Cunard shipping line. He was 
born in Wales in 1787, dying in 1865. 
 
Curie 
Marie Curie was a French scientist. She was born in 1867 at warsaw and 
died in 1934. She and her husband together separated radium in 1902. 
 
Curzon 
George Nathaniel Curzon was an English statesman. He was born in 1859 and 
died in 1925. He was foreign secretary from 1919 until 1924.  
 
Cyrus 
Cyrus was a Persian emperor. He was born in 559bc, dying in 529bc.  
 
Daci 
see "Getae" 
 
Daguerre 
Louis Jacques Mande Daguerre was a French scientist. He was born in 1789 
and died in 1851. He discovered the process of photography and invented 
the diorama. 
 
Daimios 
The Daimios were a class of feudal Lords in Japan. In 1871 they were 
deprived of their priviledges and jurisdiction and made official govenors 
for the state in districts they had previously held as feudal rulers.  
 
Dalgarno 
George Dalgarno was a Scottish educationalist. He was born in 1627 at 
Aberdeen and died in 1687. He wrote "Didascalocophus" which was a tutor 
for the deaf. 
 
Dali 
Salvador Dali is a Spanish painter. He was born in 1904. He is a 
surrealist painter.  
 
Dalton 
John Dalton was an English scientist. He was born in 1766, dying in 1844. 
He is famous for discovering atomic theory. 
 
Dampier 
William Dampier was an English explorer. He was born in 1652. He died in 
1715.  
 
Danebrog 
Danebrog were an order of Danish knights instituted in 1219, and revived 
in 1693. 
 
Dankalil 
The Dankalil (singular Dankali) are (were?) a number of tribes that 
inhabited East Africa near the Red Sea. They were generally fishermen or 
cattle rearers and practised Islam.  
 
Dante 
Alighieri Dante was an Italian poet. He was born in 1265 at Florence and 
died in 1321.  
 
Danton 
George Jacques Danton was one of the leaders of the French revolution. He 
was born in 1759 and died in 1794.  
 
Darius 
Darius was the name of three Persian kings. Darius the Great reigned from 
521BC until 486BC. He was defeated by the Greeks at Marathon. 
 
Darlan 
Jean Darlan was a French admiral. He was c-in-c of the French navy from 
1939 until 1940. He took part in the evacuation of Dunkirk. He later 
became pro-German and was assassinated by a fellow Frenchman in 1942.  
 
Darling 
Grace Darling was born in 1815 at Bamborough and died in 1842. She was 
the daughter of a lighthouse keeper at Longstone. On September 7th 1838 
she and her father rowed out to a rock and rescued nine survivors from 
the wreck of the Forfashire. For this she was awarded a gold medal by the 
Humane Society. 
 
Darwin 
Charles Robert Darwin was an English naturalist. He was born in 
Shrewsbury in 1809, dying in 1882. He published his theory of evolution 
in a book entitled the origin of species in 1859. 
 
Daudet 
Alphonse Daudet was a French novelist. He was born in 1840 at Nimes and 
died in 1897. 
 
Daumier 
Honore Daumier was a French painter and cartoonist. He was born in 1808 
at Marseilles and died in 1879. He produced almost 4000 lithographs.  
 
David 
David was King of Scotland from 1124 to 1153. Jacques Louis David was a 
French historical painter. He was born in 1748 and died in 1825.  
 
David II 
David II was King of Scotland from 1329 to 1371.  
 
Davy 
Sir Humphrey Davy was an English scientist. He was born in 1778 at 
Penzance and died in 1829. He discovered the anaesthetic properties of 
laughing gas. 
 
Dawber 
Sir Guy Dawber was an English architect. He was born in 1861, dying in 
1938. He did a lot of work to bring about the restoration of buildings 
throughout England. 
 
Day Lewis 
Cecil Day Lewis was an English poet and critic. He was born in 1904, 
dying in 1972. He was professor of poetry at oxford university. He became 
the poet laureate in 1968. 
 
Dayak 
The Dayak are aboriginal people of Indonesian Borneo and Sarawak. 
 
De Forest 
Lee De Forest was an American inventor. He was born in 1873, dying in 
1961. He was the first person to use alternating-current transmission. He 
improved the thermionic valve detector enabling wireless and sound films 
to be made.  
 
De Gaulle 
Charles De Gaulle was a French soldier and statesman. He was born in 1890 
and died in 1969. During the Second World War he was leader of the Free 
French Forces. In 1944 he led the liberation forces that entered Paris, 
and defeating the Communists who had stayed in France and fought the 
Nazis, became head of the provisional government.  
 
De Quincey 
Thomas De Quincey was an English writer. He was born in 1785 and died in 
1859.  
 
De Valera 
Eamon De Valera is an Irish national leader. He commanded an insurgent 
battalion during the uprising og Easter 1916. He established the 
independant state of Eire in 1937.  
 
Debussy 
Claude Achille Debussy was a French composer. He was born in 1862, dying 
in 1918. He was leader of the French impressionist school in music.  
 
Decemvirs 
The Decemvirs were the 10 magistrates who had absolute authority in 
Ancient Rome. 
 
Defoe 
Daniel Defoe was an English political writer. He was born in 1660, dying 
in 1731. He is perhaps most famous for writing the novel robinson crusoe. 
He was imprisoned for writing the work the shortest way with dissenters. 
 
Degas 
Edgar Degas was a French painter. He was born in 1834 at Paris and died 
in 1917.  
 
Dekker 
Thomas Dekker was an English dramatist and writer. He was born in 1570 
and died in 1641. He wrote plays which provide a view of contemporary 
life in London.  
 
Delacroix 
Ferdinand Victor Eugene Delacroix was a French historical painter. He was 
born in 1798 at Charenton and died in 1863. 
 
Delambre 
Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre was a French astronomer. He was born in 
1749 in Amiens and died in 1822.  
 
Delane 
John Thaddeus Delane was editor of the Times newspaper. He was born in 
1817 and died in 1879. He became editor in 1841 and remained until 1877. 
During his editorship the newspaper gained in influence and circulation.  
 
Delavigne 
Jean Francois Casimir Delavigne was a French poet and dramatist. He was 
born in 1793 at Havre and died in 1843. 
 
Delaware Indians 
The Delaware Indians were a North American tribe of Indians of the 
Algonquin family. They were so called Delaware because they lived on the 
Delaware river, although they called themselves Lenni Lenape. 
 
Delibes 
Leo Delibes was a French composer. He was born in 1836 and died in 1891.  
 
Delius 
Frederick Delius was an English composer. He was born in 1862 at Bradford 
and died in 1934. Despite becoming blind and paralysed at the age of 
fifty he continued to compose. 
 
Dene 
The Dene are a North American Indian tribe found in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada.  
 
Descartes 
Rene Descartes was a French mathematician and philosopher. He was born in 
1596 and died in 1650. He invented Cartesian geometry.  
 
Destri 
James Destri played keyboards with the 70's punk rock band Blondie. 
 
Devereux 
Robert Devereux was the Second Earl Of Essex. An Elizabethan soldier and 
courtier he was born in 1566 at Herefordshire and died in 1601. He was a 
lover to Elizabeth I. 
 
Diaghilev 
Sergi Pavlovich Diaghilev was a Russian impressario. He was born in 1872 
and died in 1929.  
 
Dias 
Allan Dias is bass player with Public Image Ltd 
 
Diaz 
Porfirio Diaz was a Mexican general and politician. He was born in 1830 
and died in 1915. He was elected president in 1876. 
 
Dickens 
Charles Dickens was a 19th century English novelist whose powerful 
imagery brought to public attention the terrible conditions endured by 
the poor. 
 
Diderot 
Denis Diderot was a French philosopher, novelist, playwright and critic. 
He was born in 1713 and died in 1784.  
 
Diggers 
The diggers were a pacifist and radical sect of 17th century England. 
 
Dike 
Dike was the attendant of justice to Nemesis. 
 
Diocletian 
Diocletian was a Roman Emperor. He was born in 243 and died in 313. He 
was proclaimed Emperor by the troops at Chalcedon in 284.  
 
Diogenes 
Diogenes was a Greek philosopher. He was born in 412BC and died in 323BC. 
 
Diplomat 
A Diplomat is a person sent to a foreign country as one of the 
representatives of his country. Traditionally diplomats have spied on 
their host country.  
 
Disney 
Walt Disney was an American artist and film producer. He was born in 1901 
and died in 1967. He is best remembered for his animations. His first 
successful animated film was Mickey Mouse which was released in 1928. 
 
Disraeli 
Benjamin Disraeli was a British statesman and writer. He was born in 
1804, dying in 1881. 
 
Donald 
Donald was King of Scotland from 860 to 863.  
 
Donald Bane 
Donald Bane was King of Scotland during 1093. 
 
Donald II 
Donald II was King of Scotland from 878 to 889. 
 
Donald Maclean 
Donald Maclean was a British diplomat. He defected to the Russians with 
Guy Burgess in 1951.  
 
Donatello 
Donatello was an Italian opera composer. He was born in 1797 and died in 
1848.  
 
Donne 
John Donne was an English poet. He was born in 1573 at London and died in 
1631. 
 
Dore 
Paul Gustav Dore was a French artist. He was born in 1833 at Strasbourg 
and died in 1883. 
 
Dostoievski 
Fyodor Dostoievski was a Russian novelist. He was born in 1821 at Moscow 
and died in 1881. He studied military engineering before joining the 
army. He was arrested in 1849 for being a member of a socialist society 
and sentanced to four years in Siberia. 
 
Douglas-Home 
Sir Alexander Frederick Douglas-Home is a British Conservative statesman. 
He was educated at Eton and Oxford. He entered Parliament in 1931. In 
1960 he became Foreign Secretary. In 1963 he became Prime Minister. 
 
Dowland 
Hohn Dowland was an English lutanist and song writer. He was born in 1563 
and died in 1626. 
 
Doyle 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was a British author. He trained in medicine, but 
started writing to earn some money. He is best remembered for creating 
the character Sherlock Holmes.  
 
Drake 
Sir Francis Drake was an English seaman. He was born in 1545, dying in 
1596.  
 
Dreiser 
Theodore Dreiser was an American writer born in 1871. He died in 1945.  
 
Dreyfus 
Captain Alfred Dreyfus was a French officer falsely accused of espionage. 
He was born in 1859 and died in 1935. 
 
Druid 
The druids were ancient celtic priests. Their group still exists today in 
secret, despite the existence of charlatan groups claiming to be druids.  
 
Dryades 
The dryades were nymphs of the woods and trees. 
 
Dryden 
Hohn Dryden was a Britsh poet. He was born in 1631 and died in 1700.  
 
Duccio 
Di Buoninsegna Duccio was an Italian painter. He was born in 1255 and 
died in 1319. He founded the Sienese school.  
 
Duchamp 
Marcel Duchamp was a French artist. He was born in 1887 and died in 1968. 
 
Duell 
William Duell was executed for murder at Tyburn in 1740, but whilst 
undergoing dissection at Surgeons' Hall he came back to life. 
 
Duff 
Duff was King of Scotland from 962 to 967.  
 
Dufy 
Raoul Dufy was a French painter. He was born in 1877 and died in 1953.  
 
Dukas 
Paul Dukas was a French composer. He was born in 1865 at Paris and died 
in 1935. His most popular work is the Sorcerer's Apprentice which was 
used by Walt Disney in his film Fantasia. 
 
Duke 
Duke is the highest title in English peerage. 
 
Dumas 
Alexandre Dumas was a French novelist and dramatist. He was born in 1802 
and died in 1870. He wrote The Three Musketeers, The Count Of Monte 
Cristo and The Black Tulip.  
 
Duncan 
Duncan was King of Scotland from 1034 to 1040.  
 
Duncan II 
Duncan II was King of Scotland during 1093. 
 
Duns Scotus 
John Duns Scotus was a Scottish philosopher. He was born in 1265 at 
Roxburghshire and died in 1308. 
 
Dunstan 
Archbishop Dunstan was advisor to King edgar of England.  
 
Duparc 
Henri Duparc was a French composer. He was born in Paris in 1848. He died 
in 1933.  
 
Durer 
Albrecht Durer was a German painter and engraver. He was born in 1471 at 
Nuremburg and died in 1528.  
 
Dvorak 
Antonin Dvorak was a Czech composer. He was born in 1841 and died in 
1904.  
 
Dyck 
Sir Antony Van Dyck was a Dutch artist. He was born in 1599 at Antwerp 
and died in 1641. He was an assistant to Rubens. 
 
Eddington 
Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington was a British astronomer and mathematician. 
He was born in 1882 at Kendal and died in 1944. He studied the internal 
constitution of stars. 
 
Eddy 
Mary Baker Eddy was the founder of the Christian Science Movement. She 
was born in 1821 and died in 1910. 
 
Edgar 
Edgar was King of England from 959 to 975. Edgar was King of Scotland 
from 1097 to 1107.  
 
Edison 
Thomas Alva Edison was an American scientist. He was born in 1847 and 
died in 1931. He invented the carbon filiament electric lamp and the 
phonograph.  
 
Edmund 
Edmund (the Elder) succeeded Athelstan as King of England from 940 to 
946. Edmund (ironside) was a son of ethelred and King of England in 1016. 
 
Edred 
Edred succeeded Edmund as King of England from 946 to 955.  
 
Edward 
Edward (the Elder) was King of England from 901 to 924. Edward (the 
martyr) was son of edgar and succeeded him as King of England from 975 to 
978. Edward (the confessor) was a son of ethelred and King of England 
from 1042 to 1066.  
 
Edward I 
Edward I was King of England from 1272 to 1307. 
 
Edward II 
Edward II was King of England from 1307 to 1327.  
 
Edward III 
Edward III was son of Edward II and King of England from 1327 to 1377.  
 
Edward IV 
Edward IV was King of England from 1461 to 1483.  
 
Edward V 
Edward V was King of England in 1483. 
 
Edward VI 
Edward VI was King of England from 1547 to 1553.  
 
Edward VII 
Edward VII was King of England from 1901 to 1910. 
 
Edward VIII 
Edward VIII was King of England in 1936.  
 
Edwy 
Edwy (son of Edmund the Elder) succeeded Edred as King of England from 
955 to 959.  
 
Egyptian 
An Egyptian is an inhabitant of Egypt.  
 
Ehrlich 
Paul Ehrlich was a German bacteriologist. He was born in 1854 and died in 
1915. He shared the Nobel prize for medicine in 1908 and invented 
Salvarsan.  
 
Einstein 
Albert Einstein was a German Swiss physicist, born in 1879, and died 
1955.  
 
Eisenhower 
Dwight David Eisenhower was an American President and military leader. He 
was born in 1890 at Texas and died in 1969. 
 
Electryon 
Electryon was a son of Perseus and Andromeda. 
 
Elgar 
Sir Edward Elgar was an English composer. He was born in 1857 and died in 
1934. 
 
Eliot 
George Eliot was the published name of Mary Ann Evans. She was a famous 
English novelist who wrote silas Marner and mill On the Floss.  
 
Elizabeth 
Elizabeth was queen of England. Born 1533, and died 1603 she was queen 
from 1558 to 1603. 
 
Elizabeth II 
Elizabeth II is the queen of England. She ascended the throne in 1952.  
 
Empedocles 
Empedocles was a Greek philosopher. He was born in 495BC at Sicily and 
died in 435BC. He advocated the experimental method in science.  
 
Engels 
Friedrich Engels was the co-founder with Karl Marx of scientific 
socialism. He was born in 1820 and died in 1895. 
 
Epicurus 
Epicurus was a Greek philosopher. He was born in 341BC on the island of 
Samos and died in 270BC. He opposed the teachings of Plato as mystical, 
stating that knowledge of the world could only come from the study of the 
behaviour of matter.  
 
Epimetheus 
Epimetheus was the brother of prometheus. 
 
Epstein 
Sir Jacob Epstein was an American born sculptor who lived in England. He 
was born in 1880 and died in 1959. 
 
Erasmus 
Desiderius Erasmus was a Dutch scholar. He was born in 1466 at Rotterdam 
and died in 1536. He wrote much about the Greek and Latin classics.  
 
Eratosthenes 
Eratosthenes was an ancient Greek geographer and mathematician. 
 
Ethelred 
Ethelred was a son of Edgar and succeeded Edward the martyr as King of 
England from 978 to 1016.  
 
Euclid 
Euclid was a Greek mathematician. His book the Elements of Geometry set 
down how geometry was to be taught for the next 2000 years. He was born 
in 365BC and died in 275BC. 
 
Euripides 
Euripides was a Greek dramatist. He was born in 480BC at Phyla on the 
island of Salamis and died in 406BC.  
 
Evzone 
An evzone is a member of a select Greek infantry regiment.  
 
Eyck 
Hubert Van Eyck was born in 1370 and died in 1426. With his brother Jan 
he founded the flemish school of painting. Jan Van Eyck was born in 1390 
and died in 1441.  
 
Fabius Maximus 
Fabius Maximus was the Roman dictator who saved Rome from Hannibal by 
deliberately avoiding battle. 
 
Falla 
Manuel de Falla was a Spanish composer. He was born in 1876 at Cadiz and 
died in 1946.  
 
Fama 
Fama was an alternative name for Pheme. 
 
Fantin-Latour 
Henri Fantin-Latour was a French painter. He was born in 1836 at Grenoble 
and died in 1904. 
 
Faraday 
Michael Faraday was a British chemist. He was born in 1791. He died in 
1867. He discovered electrical currents and invented the dynamo. The 
farad is named after him. 
 
Faulkner 
William Harrison Faulkner was an American author. He was born in 1897 and 
died in 1962. 
 
Faure 
Gabriel Urbain Faure was a French composer. He was born in 1845 at 
Parniers and died in 1924. 
 
Fawkes 
Guy Fawkes was the English conspirator who tried to blow up Parliament 
during the Gunpowder Plot in 1604. He was born in 1570 and died in 1606. 
 
Feisal 
Feisal was king of Iraq. He was born in 1885 and died in 1933. He was 
appointed king of Syria in 1920 but deposed shortly afterwards. In 1921 
he was elected King of Iraq.  
 
Fenian 
The Fenians were an organization of Irish Americans formed in the middle 
of the 19th century to promote revolution and the overthrow of the 
English government in Ireland.  
 
Fermat 
Pierre de Fermat was a French mathematician. He was born in 1601 at 
Toulouse and died in 1665. His most important work was on the theory of 
numbers.  
 
Fermi 
Enrico Fermi was an Italian physicist. He was born in 1901 at Rome and 
died in 1954. He worked primarily in nuclear energy. 
 
Fichte 
Johann Gottlieb Fichte was a German philosopher. He was born in 1762 and 
died in 1814.  
 
Field 
John Field was an Irish composer. He was born in 1782 at Dublin and died 
in 1837. He gave his first public piano recital when he was nine.  
 
Fielding 
Henry Fielding was an English writer. He was born in 1707 near 
Glastonbury and died in 1754. He wrote the novel Tom Jones.  
 
Fitzgerald 
Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald was an American novelist. He was born in 
1896 and died in 1940. He wrote The Great Gatsby. 
 
Fizeau 
A. H. L. Fizeau was a French physicist. He was born in 1819 at Paris and 
died in 1896. He measured the speed of light in 1849.  
 
Flamsteed 
John Flamsteed was an English astronomer. He was born in 1646 and died in 
1719. He is remembered for cataloguing the stars. 
 
Flaubert 
Gustave Flaubert was a French novelist. He was born in 1821 and died in 
1880. He had an unusual writing style in that he insisted that every word 
should be the most apt and every phrase exact. This meant it often took 
him a week to write one page. 
 
Flecker 
James Elroy Flecker was an English poet. He was born in 1884 at London 
and died in 1915.  
 
Fleming 
Sir Ambrose Fleming was an English scientist. He was born in 1849 and 
died in 1945. In 1904 he invented the thermionic valve. 
 
Foch 
Ferdinand Foch was a French soldier. He was born in 1851 at Tarbes and 
died in 1929. He became generalissimo of the Allied armies in 1918 and 
drove the Germans back during the Great War.  
 
Fokker 
Anthony Fokker was a Dutch airman and aeronautical engineer. He was born 
in 1860, dying in 1939.  
 
Folc-mote 
In Saxon England, a Folc-mote was an assembly of people to consult 
respecting public affairs. 
 
Ford 
Henry Ford was the founder of the Ford motor car company and the pioneer 
of the cheap motor car.  
 
Forster 
Edward Morgan Forster was an English novelist. He was born in 1879 and 
died in 1970. He wrote Howard's End and A Passage To India.  
 
Foucault 
Jean Bernard Leon Foucault was a French physicist. He was born in 1819, 
dying in 1868. He invented a pendulum to demonstrate the rotation of the 
earth by the rotation of its plane of oscillation. 
 
Fouquet 
Jean Fouquet was a French painter. He was born in 1420 at Tours and died 
in 1482. He was court painter to Charles VIII from 1475. 
 
Fourier 
Charles Fourier was a French socialist writer. He was born in 1772, dying 
in 1837.  
 
Fox 
George Fox was the founder of the Society Of Friends. He was born in 
1624, dying in 1691. Charles James Fox was an English statesman. He was 
born in 1749 and died in 1806. 
 
Fox Indians 
The Fox Indians are a tribe of North American Indians belonging to the 
Algonquin family and found scattered over Iowa, Kansas and Nebraska. 
 
Fragonard 
Jean Honore Fragonard was a French painter. He was born in 1732 and died 
in 1806. 
 
France 
Anatole France was a French author. He was born in 1844 and died in 1924. 
He won the Nobel prize for literature in 1921.  
 
Franck 
Cesar Auguste Franck was a French composer. He was born in 1822 at Liege 
and died in 1890. He wrote one symphony and organ music. 
 
Franco 
General Francisco Franco was the dictator of Spain. He was born in 1892. 
He rose to power during the Spanish Civil War. 
 
Franklin 
Benjamin Franklin was an American statesman and scientist. He was born in 
1706 at Boston and died in 1790.  
 
Franks 
The Franks were a Germanic tribe which overthrew the Romans in Gaul and 
gave origin to the name France for the area.  
 
Fraunhofer 
Joseph von Fraunhofer was a German physicist. He was born in 1787 at 
Strasbourg and died in 1826. 
 
Frazer 
Sir James George Frazer was a British scholar and anthropologist. He 
studied the religion and magic of primitive peoples, the findings of 
which he published in the book The Golden Bough. He was born in 1854 and 
died in 1941.  
 
Frederick II 
Frederick II (Frederick The Great) was King of Prussia. He was born in 
1712 and died in 1786. He prefered the French way of life to the 
Prussian, and he improved the economy and conditions of his country.  
 
Fremiet 
Emmanuel Fremiet was a French sculptor. He was born in 1824 and died in 
1910. His works include the statue of Ferdinand de Lesseps at the 
entrance to the Suez Canal. 
 
Frere 
Sir Henry Bartle Edward Frere was the South African High Commissioner, 
whose abortive attempt to unite South Africa resulted in the Zulu War. He 
was born in 1815 and died in 1884. 
 
Freshfield 
Douglas William Freshfield was an English explorer and mountaineer. He 
was born in 1845. He was the first person to climb mount Kazbek. 
 
Frisians 
The Frisians were a Germanic tribe who lived between the Rhine and the 
Ems during Roman times. They were a peaceful tributary of Rome untill 
opression drove them to hostilities. 
 
Frobisher 
Sir Martin Frobisher was an English navigator. He was born in 1535 and 
died in 1594. He distinguished himself against the Spanish Armada, and 
was the first Englishman to attempt a North-west passage to Cathay. 
 
Froding 
Gustav Froding was a Swedish poet. He was born in 1860 and died in 1911.  
 
Froebel 
Friedrich Wilhelm August Froebel was a German educationalist. He was born 
in 1782 and died in 1852. He originated the kindergarten system of 
teaching young children. 
 
Froissart 
Jean Froissart was a French chronicler. He was born in 1333 at 
Valenciennes and died in 1405. 
 
Frontenac 
Louis de Baude Frontenac was a French colonial administrator. He was 
governor of Canada and conducted a campaign against the Iroquois in 1695. 
He was born in 1620 and died in 1698.  
 
Frost 
Robert Frost was an American poet. He was born in 1875 at San Fancisco 
and died in 1963.  
 
Fry 
Christopher Fry is an English dramatist. He was born in 1907. 
 
Fulton 
Robert Fulton was an American inventor. He was born in 1765 at Little 
Britain.  
 
Furlani 
The Furlani are inhabitants of Friuli, a once independant duchy at the 
head of the Adriatic, now part of Italy and Austria. 
 
Fuseli 
Henry Fuseli was a Swiss artist. He was born in 1741 at Zurich and died 
in 1825. He was a friend to William Blake, and was keeper of the Royal 
Academy from 1804 until 1825.  
 
Gadhel 
see "Gael" 
 
Gael 
Gael (Gadhel) is the name of the Celts inhabiting Scotland, Ireland and 
the Isle Of Man.  
 
Gael Albinnich 
Gael Albinnich are the Gael people of the Scottish Highlands. 
 
Gael Erinnich 
Gael Erinnich is the division of the Gael people living in Ireland. 
 
Gagarin 
Yuri Gagarin was a Russian cosmonaut and the first man to go into space 
in 1961.  
 
Gainsborough 
Thomas Gainsborough was an English painter. He was born in 1727 at 
Sudbury and died in 1788. He is remembered for his portraits and 
landscapes. 
 
Galen 
Claudius Galen was an ancient medical writer. He was one of the founders 
of anatomy and the founder of vivisection. 
 
Galileo 
Galileo was an Italian scientist. He was born in 1564, dying in 1642. He 
discovered the ring of saturn, jupiter's 4 major satellites and the sun's 
spots. 
 
Gallas 
The Gallas are a people of East Africa. They are tall, with dark brown 
skin, wiry bodies. Their nose is often straight or arched and they have 
moderate lips. 
 
Galsworthy 
John Galsworthy was a novelist. He was born in 1869, dying in 1933. He is 
famous for writing the forsyte saga.  
 
Galt 
John Galt was a Scottish author of stories dealing with Scottish life. He 
was born in 1779 and died in 1839.  
 
Galton 
Sir Francis Galton was an English anthropologist and eugenist. He made 
explorations in south west Africa. He established the theory of 
anticyclones in meterology. He was born in 1822 and died in 1911.  
 
Galvani 
Luigi Galvani was an Italian physiologist. He was born in 1737 and died 
in 1798. He made the first investigations into the action of electrical 
activity in the muscles of animals. 
 
Gandhi 
Mahatma Gandhi was an Indian national leader. He was born in 1869 and 
died in 1948. He sought Indian independance through non-violent civil 
disobedience which earned him great respect.  
 
Ganymeda 
Ganymeda is an alternative name for Hebe. 
 
Ganymedes 
Ganymedes was a son of the Trojan King Tros. He was carried off by Zeus 
and became the cup-bearer of the gods.  
 
Garibaldi 
Giuseppe Garibaldi was an Italian patriot and liberator. He was born in 
1807 and died in 1882.  
 
Garrick 
David Garrick was an English actor. He was born in 1717 at Hereford and 
died in 1779. 
 
Gaskell 
Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell was an English novelist. She was born in 1810 
and died in 1865.  
 
Gauchos 
The Gauchos are a native people of the Pampas of the La Plata countries 
in South America. They are descended from the Spanish invaders and are 
noted for their strong will, independence, horsemanship and skill with a 
lasso.  
 
Gauguin 
Paul Gauguin was a French painter. He was born in 1848 at Paris and died 
in 1903. 
 
Gauss 
Karl Friedrich Gauss was a German mathematician. He was born in 1777 at 
Brunswick and died in 1855. He demonstrated that a circle can be divided 
into 17 equal arcs by elementary geometry. 
 
Gautier 
Theophile Gautier was a French poet and novelist. He was born in 1811 at 
Tarbes and died in 1872. 
 
Gay 
John Gay was an English dramatist. He was born in 1685 at Barnstaple and 
died in 1732.  
 
Gay-Lussac 
Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac was a French scientist. He was born in 1778 at 
St. Leonard and died in 1850. He worked in the field of gases. 
 
Genghis Khan 
Genghis Khan was a Mongolian chieftain and warrior. He was born in 1162 
and died in 1227. He conquered most of China, Turkistan and Afghanistan.  
 
Genii 
Genii is an alternative name for the daemons. 
 
Genseric 
Genseric was a Vandal king. He was invited to Africa in 429 by the Roman 
governor, Bonifactus. Genseric declared his independance, overthrew 
Bonifactus and in 455 took Rome. 
 
George I 
George I was King of England from 1714 to 1727. 
 
George II 
George II was a son of George I and King of England from 1727 to 1760.  
 
George III 
George III was King of England from 1760 to 1820. 
 
George IV 
George IV was King of England from 1820 to 1830.  
 
George V 
George V was King of England from 1910 to 1936. 
 
George VI 
George VI was King of England from 1936 to 1952.  
 
Gericault 
Theodore Gericault was a French painter. He was born in 1791 at Rouen and 
died in 1824. He introduced the idea of painting directly onto canvas.  
 
German 
Sir Edward German was an English composer. He was born in 1862 at 
Whitchurch and died in 1936. He produced light operas including Merrie 
England and Tom Jones. 
 
Gershwin 
George Gershwin was an American composer. He was born in 1898 at New York 
and died in 1937. He produced Porgy and Bess which was the first American 
folk opera. 
 
Getae 
The Getae (Daci) were an ancient people of Europe who lived at Thrace and 
then moved west to the north bank of the Danube where they became known 
by the Romans as the Daci.  
 
Ghiberti 
Lorenzo Ghiberti was a Florentine sculptor. He was born in 1378 and died 
in 1455. 
 
Ghirlandaio 
Domenico Ghirlandaio was a Florentine sculptor. He was born in 1449 and 
died in 1494. 
 
Gibbon 
Edward Gibbon was an English writer. He was born in 1737 at Putney and 
died in 1794. He wrote the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 
 
Gibbons 
Grinling Gibbons was an English woodcarver. He was born in 1648 at 
Rotterdam and died in 1720. Orlando Gibbons was an English composer. He 
was born in 1583 and died in 1625. 
 
Gide 
Andre Paul Guillaume Gide was a French writer. He was born in 1869 and 
died in 1951.  
 
Gilbert 
William Gilbert was an English physician and physicist. He was born in 
1544 at Colchester and died in 1603. He coined the word electricity to 
describe the property of amber for attracting light objects. He also 
pioneered work into magnetism. 
 
Gillray 
James Gillray was an English artist and cariacturist. He was born in 1757 
and died in 1815. 
 
Giorgione 
Giorgione was a Venetian painter. He was born in 1478 and died in 1510. 
 
Giotto de Bondone 
Giotto de Bondone was an Italian painter and architect. He was born in 
1267 and died in 1337. 
 
Giraudoux 
Jean Giraudoux was a French poet, novelaist and playwright. He was born 
in 1882 and died in 1944. 
 
Girolamo Savonarola 
Girolamo Savonarola was an Italian religious and political reformer. He 
was born in 1452 and died in 1498.  
 
Girtin 
Thomas Girtin was an English watercolour artist. He was born in 1775 and 
died in 1802.  
 
Gladiator 
A gladiator was a Roman professional fighter. The first known instance of 
gladiators being exhibited was in 264BC by Marcus and Decimus Brutus at 
the funeral of their father.  
 
Gladstone 
William Ewart Gladstone was an English Liberal member of parliament. He 
was born in 1808 and died in 1898. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer 
from 1852 until 1855 and Prime Minister from 1868 until 1874 and again 
from 1880 until 1885 and yet again from 1892 until 1894. 
 
Glazunov 
Alexander Glazunov was a Russian composer. He was born in 1865 at St. 
Petersburg and died in 1936.  
 
Glinka 
Mikhail Glinka was a Russian composer. He was born in 1803 at Smolensk 
and died in 1857.  
 
Gluck 
Christoph Willibald Von Gluck was a German composer of operas. He was 
born in 1714 at Bavaria and died in 1787. 
 
Godwin 
Godwin was Earl of the west saxons. He died in 1053. 
William Godwin was an English political writer and philosopher. He was 
born in 1756, dying in 1836.  
 
Goebbels 
Goebbels was the propaganda minister of the nazis.  
 
Goethe 
Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe was a German poet. He was born in 1749 and 
died in 1832. 
 
Gogh 
Vincent Van Gogh was a Dutch painter. He was born in 1853 at Brabant and 
died in 1890 after shooting himself. 
 
Gogol 
Nikolai Vasilievich Gogol was a Russian novelist and dramatist. He was 
born in 1809 and died in 1852. 
 
Golden Horde 
The Golden Horde were originally a powerful Mongol tribe, the name 
however became applied to all followers of Gengis Khan and of his 
grandson, Batu.  
 
Goldoni 
Carlo Goldoni was an Italian dramatist. He was born in 1707 at venice and 
died in 1793 at Paris.  
 
Goldsmith 
Oliver Goldsmith was a journalist. He was born in 1728 at Ireland and 
died in 1774. 
 
Gonds 
The Gonds are the aboriginal, non-Aryan inhabitants of the old 
territorial division of India called Gondwana. They lost their 
independance in 1781 to the Mahrattas.  
 
Gordon 
General Charles George Gordon was an English military leader. He was born 
in 1833 at Woolwich and died in 1885 following his capture during the 
seige of Khartoum.  
 
Gorky 
Maxim Gorky was a Russian writer. He was born in 1868 and died in 1936. 
 
Goths 
The Goths (Visigoths) were an east Germanic people that settled near the 
black sea in the 2nd century ad. 
 
Gounod 
Charles Francois Gounod was a French composer. He was born in 1818 at 
Paris and died in 1893. 
 
Goya 
Francisco Jose de Goya Y Lucientes was a Spanish painter. He was born in 
1746 and died in 1828. 
 
Graces 
Graces is an alternative name for the charites. 
 
Graeae 
The Graeae were three daughters of Phorcys and Ceto. They had only one 
eye and one tooth between them which they shared. Perseus forced them to 
tell him where he could find medusa by stealing their solitary eye and 
tooth. 
 
Grahame 
Kenneth Grahame was a Scottish author. He was born in 1859 and died in 
1922. He wrote The Wind In The Willows.  
 
Graves 
Robert Ranke Graves was an English poet and novelist. He was born in 
1895.  
 
Gray 
Thomas Gray was an English writer. He was born in 1716 at London and died 
in 1771.  
 
Grecco 
El Grecco (Domenico Theotocopouli) was a Spanish painter. He was born in 
1541 and died in 1614. 
 
Greek 
A Greek is an inhabitant of Greece. 
 
Greenaway 
Kate Greenaway was an English artist and book-illustrator. She was born 
in 1846 and died in 1901. 
 
Greene 
Graham Greene is a British author. He was born in 1904. Robert Greene was 
an English dramatist and poet. He was born in 1558 and died in 1592.  
 
Grenville 
Sir Richard Grenville was an Elizabethan English seaman. He was born in 
1541 and died in 1591. He commanded Raleigh's expedition to Virginia. 
 
Grey 
Edward Grey was a British statesman. He was born in 1862 and died in 
1933. He was Foreign Secretary in 1905.  
 
Grieg 
Edward Hagerup Grieg was a Norwegian composer. He was born in 1843 at 
Bergen and died in 1907.  
 
Grimm 
Jakob Ludwig Karl Grimm was a German philologist. He was born in 1785 and 
died in 1863. Wilhelm Karl Grimm was a German philologist. He was born in 
1786 and died in 1859. Together with his brother Jakob they wrote a book 
of fairy tales.  
 
Grunewald 
Mathias Grunewald was a German religious painter. He was born in 1480 and 
died in 1530. 
 
Guardi 
Francesco Guardi was an Italian painter. He was born in 1712 at Venice 
and died in 1793.  
 
Guericke 
Otto von Guericke was a German physicist. He was born in 1602 at 
Magdeburg and died in 1686. He invented the air pump and demonstrated air 
pressure.  
 
Gutenburg 
Johann Gutenburg was a German printer. He was born in 1397 at Mainz and 
died in 1468. In 1454 he published the first bible using metal types. 
 
Guy Burgess 
Guy Francis DeMoncy Burgess was Executive Officer of the British Foreign 
Office. He defected to the Russians with Donald Maclean in 1951. 
 
Guy Fawkes 
Guy Fawkes was a Yorkshire catholic and one of the conspirators in the 
gunpowder plot. He was captured in the cellar of the houses of 
parliament, tried and executed. He was born in 1570, dying in 1606. 
 
Gwynn 
Nell Gwynn was an English actress and dancer. She was born in 1650 and 
died in 1687. She is remembered for her early career as an ornage seller 
outside the Drury Lane Theatre in London. 
 
Haakon VII 
Haakon VII was King of norway from 1905 to 1957. He was born in 1872, 
dying in 1957. He was a brave man who resisted the nazi occupation of 
norway during the second world war. 
 
Hadley 
George Hadley developed Halley's theory of trade winds by taking into 
account the earth's rotation and the displacement of air by tropical 
heat. He was born in 1685, dying in 1768.  
 
Hadrian 
Hadrian was a Roman emperor. He was born in 76, dying in 138. He visited 
England in 121 and built a protective wall to separate England from 
Scotland.  
 
Haggard 
Sir Henry Rider Haggard was an English novelist. He was born in 1856 and 
died in 1925. He wrote King Solomon's Mines. 
 
Hahn 
Otto Hahn was a German physical chemist who discovered nuclear fission. 
He was born in 1879 and died in 1968. 
 
Haig 
Douglas Haig was a British soldier. He was born in 1861 and died in 1928. 
He was commander-in-chief of the British troops in France during the 
Great War. 
 
Haile Selassie 
Haile Selassie was Emperor of Ethiopia and figure head of the Rastafarian 
movement, although he knew nothing about that! He was born in 1891. 
 
Hakluyt 
Richard Hakluyt was an English geographer. He was born in 1552 and died 
in 1616.  
 
Halifax 
Edward Halifax was a British statesman. He was born in 1881 and died in 
1959. He was British Ambassador to the USA from 1940 until 1944.  
 
Halley 
Edmund Halley was Astronomer Royal from 1720. He was born in 1656 and 
died in 1742. He calculated the orbit of the comet named after him. 
 
Hals 
Franz Hals was a Dutch portrait painter. He was born in 1580 and died in 
1666.  
 
Hamilton 
Mary Hamilton was tried in 1746 for marrying with her own sex.  
 
Han 
The Han are the majority ethnic group in China, numbering about 990 
million. The Hans speak a wide variety of dialects of the same 
monosyllabic language, a member of the Sino-Tibetan family. Their 
religion combines Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, and ancestor worship.  
 
Handel 
George Frederick Handel was an Anglo-German composer. He was born in 1685 
and died in 1759. 
 
Hannibal 
Hannibal was a Carthaginian leader. He was born in 247BC and died in 
183BC after taking poison to avoid capture by the Romans.  
 
Hardicanute 
Hardicanute was a son of Canute and King of England from 1040 to 1042.  
 
Hardie 
James Keir Hardie was a Britsih labour leader. He was born in 1856 and 
died in 1915. He founded the Independant Labour Party in 1893. 
 
Hardy 
Thomas Hardy was an English author. He was born in 1840 at Dorchester and 
died in 1928. He wrote The Mayor of Casterbridge. 
 
Hargreaves 
James Hargreaves was a Lancashire weaver who invented the spinning-jenny. 
 
Harmonists 
The Harmonists were a religious sect founded at Wurtemberg in 1788 by 
George and Frederick Rapp. They endeavoured to re-establish the social 
practices of the early christian church, practising celibacy and holding 
all goods in common. They were persecuted and so moved to America in 
1805.  
 
Harold 
Harold was son of Canute and was King of England from 1035 to 1040. 
 
Haroun-Al-Raschid 
Haroun-Al-Raschid was Caliph of Baghdad. He was born in 764 and died in 
809.  
 
Harry 
Deborah (Debbie) Harry was lead singer with the 70's punk band Blondie. 
An ex-prostitute she excited young male audiences with her silky voice 
and short skirts.  
 
Harte 
Francis Bret Harte was an American poet. He was born in 1836 and died in 
1902.  
 
Harvey 
William Harvey was an English physician. He was born in 1578 at 
Folkestone and died in 1657. He discovered the circulation of the blood.  
 
Hastings 
Warren Hastings was governor general of India. He was born in 1732 and 
died in 1818. In 1788 he was tried for high crimes and misdemeanors. The 
trial lasted 7 years until he was acquitted in 1795.  
 
Hathaway 
Anne Hathaway was reputedly the wife of Shakespeare. She was born in 1556 
and died in 1623. 
 
Hausa 
The Hausa are a Muslim people of north Nigeria. 
 
Hawkins 
Sir John Hawkins was an Elizabethan sailor. He was born in 1532 and died 
in 1595. 
 
Hawthorne 
Nathaniel Hawthorne was an American writer. He was born in 1804 and died 
in 1864. 
 
Haydn 
Franz Joseph Haydn was an Austrian composer. He was born in 1732, dying 
in 1809.  
 
Hazlitt 
William Hazlitt was an English writer. He was born in 1778 at Maidstone 
and died in 1830. 
 
Hegel 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was a German philosopher. He was born in 
1770 at Stuttgart and died in 1831.  
 
Heine 
Heinrich Heine was a German lyric poet. He was born in 1797 at Dusseldorf 
and died in 1856. 
 
Hellene 
Hellene is an alternate name for a Greek. 
 
Helmholtz 
Hermann von Helmholtz was a German scientist. He was born in 1821 at 
Ptsdam and died in 1894. He discovered the law of the conservation of 
energy in 1847.  
 
Helot 
The helot were a class of slaves in ancient sparta. 
 
Helvetii 
The Helvetii were a people living in the area now called Switzerland 
around Roman times. They were persecuted by the Romans under Vitellius 
for refusing to acknowledge him as Emperor and were almost wiped out. 
 
Hemingway 
Ernest Hemingway was an American novelist. He was born in 1898 at Oak 
Park and died in 1961.  
 
Henry 
Henry was a son of William The Conqueror and King of England from 1101 to 
1135. 
 
Henry II 
Henry II was King of England from 1154 to 1189. 
 
Henry III 
Henry III was King of England from 1216 to 1272.  
 
Henry IV 
Henry IV was King of England from 1399 to 1413. 
 
Henry V 
Henry V was King of England from 1413 to 1422.  
 
Henry VI 
Henry VI was son of Henry V and King of England from 1422 to 1461.  
 
Henry VII 
Henry VII was King of England from 1485 to 1509.  
 
Henry VIII 
Henry VIII was King of England from 1509 to 1547. 
 
Herodotus 
Herodotus was a Greek historian. He was born in 484BC and died in 420BC.  
 
Herrick 
Robert Herrick was an English poet. He was born in 1591 and died in 1674. 
 
Herschel 
Sir William Herschel was an anglo-German astronomer. He was born in 1738 
and died in 1822. He discovered the planet Uranus. 
 
Hertz 
Heinrich Rudolf Hertz was a German physicist. He was born in 1857, dying 
in 1895. He confirmed maxwell's electromagnetic theory of waves and 
discovered information about their behaviour. The measurement of the 
frequency of radio waves is named after him.  
 
Heruli 
The Heruli were an ancient Germanic people, originally found on the 
northern shores of the Black sea. Under the leadership of Odoacer they 
helped in the overthrow of the Western Empire. Around the end of the 6th 
century they ceased to exist as a separate people.  
 
Hesiod 
Hesiod was a Greek poet who lived around 730BC. 
 
Hesperides 
The hesperides were daughters of Atlas and Hesperis.  
 
Hildreth 
Richard Hildreth was an American historian. He was born in 1807, dying in 
1865. He wrote the history of the united states.  
 
Hilliard 
Nicholas Hilliard was an English artist. He was born in 1547 and died in 
1619.  
 
Hilton 
James Hilton was an English writer. He was born in 1900. He wrote goodbye 
Mr Chips. 
 
Hindemith 
Paul Hindemith was a German composer. He was born in 1895.  
 
Hindenburg 
Paul von Hindenburg was a German soldier and the second president of the 
German Reich. He was born in 1847 and died in 1934.  
 
Hipparchus 
Hipparchus was a Greek astronomer. He was born in 190BC and died in 
120BC. He compiled the first known star catalogue.  
 
Hippocrates 
Hippocrates was a Greek doctor. He was born in 460BC and died in 370BC. 
He established medicine as a science. 
 
Hispanic 
A Hispanic is a person of Latin American descent from the Spanish-
speaking nations, either native-born or an immigrant. 
 
Hitler 
Adolf Hitler was a German dictator. He was born in 1889 at Braunau and 
died in 1945 when he committed suicide. He was responsible for the Second 
Wold War and the murder of millions of Jews, Cripples, Homosexuals, 
Blacks, Gypsies and Communists throughout Europe.  
 
Hittites 
The Hittites were a civilization in Syria and Asia Minor around 2000BC 
until 700BC. 
 
Hmong 
A Hmong is a member of a south east Asian highland people. They are 
predominantly hill farmers, rearing pigs and cultivating rice and grain, 
and many are involved in growing the opium poppy. Estimates of the size 
of the Hmong population vary between 1.5 million and 5 million, the 
greatest number being in China. Although traditional beliefs remain 
important, many have adopted Christianity. Their language belongs to the 
Sino-Tibetan family. The Hmong wear distinctive costumes and elaborate 
silver jewelry. They are relatively recent arrivals on the south east 
Asian peninsula, many having moved south in order to avoid harassment by 
Chinese emperors. Today the Hmong live in China (Guizhou, Yunnan, Hunan), 
Laos, Thailand, Vietnam, and Myanmar. 
 
Hobbema 
Meindert Hobbema was a Dutch artist. He was born in 1638 and died in 
1709. He is remembered for his landscapes. 
 
Hobbes 
Thomas Hobbes was a British philosopher. He was born in 1588 at 
Malmesbury and died in 1679. He wrote Leviathan which was the first 
British political philosophy book.  
 
Hoffmann 
Ernst Theodor Hoffmann was a German writer and composer. He was born in 
1776 and died in 1822.  
 
Hogarth 
William Hogarth was an English artist. He was born in 1697 at London and 
died in 1764.  
 
Holbein 
Hans Holbein was a German portrait and religious painter. He was born in 
1497 at Augsburg and died in 1543. 
 
Holinshed 
Raphael Holinshed was an English chronicler. He lived in the 16th century 
and wrote The Chronicles Of England, Scotland and Ireland.  
 
Holst 
Gustav Holst was an English composer. He was born in 1874 at Cheltenham 
and died in 1934. 
 
Homer 
Homer was an ancient Greek poet.  
 
Hooch 
Pieter De Hooch was a Dutch painter. He was born in 1629 and died in 
1680. He mainly painted pictures of bright domestic interiors. 
 
Hood 
Robin Hood was a legendary English folk hero who led a band of outlaws in 
Sherwood forest and opposed the tyranny and excessive taxes of King John. 
He is mentioned in the 14th century poem Piers Plowman. Thomas Hood was a 
British poet and humourist. He was born in 1799 and died in 1845. 
 
Hopewell 
Hopewell is a North American Indian agricultural culture of the central 
USA, dating from about 200. The Hopewell built burial mounds up to 12 m 
high and structures such as Serpent Mound in Ohio.  
 
Hopi 
The hopi are a north American Indian tribe living in Arizona. 
 
Hopkins 
Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins was a British scientist. He was born in 
1861 and died in 1947. He discovered vitamins.  
 
Horace 
Quintus Horatius Flaccus Horace was a Roman lyric poet. He was born in 
65BC at Venusia and died in 8BC. 
 
Horace Saussure 
Horace Saussure was a Swiss physicist born at Conches in 1740 he died in 
1799. He invented the hygrometer.  
 
Hottentot 
The hottentot are a south African tribe.  
 
Houdon 
Jean-Antoine Houdon was a French sculptor. He was born in 1741 at 
Versailles and died in 1828.  
 
Housman 
Alfred Edward Housman was a British novelist. He was born in 1859 and 
died in 1936. 
 
Hovas 
The Hovas are a native race of Madagascar.  
 
Hudson 
Henry Hudson was an English sailor and explorer. He discovered the Hudson 
river and Hudson straight.  
 
Hugo 
Victor Marie Hugo was a French poet and novelist. He was born in 1802 at 
Besancon and died in 1885. His first poems were published in 1822. 
 
Huguenots 
The Huguenots were French protestants who suffered persecution from the 
Catholics for 200 years.  
 
Hui 
The Hui are one of the largest minority ethnic groups in China, numbering 
about 25 million. Members of the Hui live all over China, but are 
concentrated in the northern central region. They have been Muslims since 
the 10th century. 
 
Humboldt 
Alexander Humboldt was a German scientist and explorer. He was born in 
1769 and died in 1859. He made several expeditions to South America and 
Central America. 
 
Hume 
David Hume was a British philosopher. He was born in 1711 at Edinburgh 
and died in 1776.  
 
Hunt 
William Holman Hunt was an English painter. He was born in 1827 at London 
and died in 1910. 
 
Huron 
Huron is a nickname for a member of a confederation of five Iroquoian 
North American Indian peoples living near lakes Huron, Erie, and Ontario 
in the 16th and 17th centuries. They were almost wiped out by the 
Iroquois. In the 17th century, surviving Hurons formed a group called 
Wyandot, some of whose descendants now live in Quebec and Oklahoma.  
 
Huss 
John Huss was a Bohemian religious reformer. He was born in 1369 and died 
in 1415.  
 
Hutu 
The Hutu are the majority ethnic group of both Burundi and Rwanda, 
numbering around 9,500,000. The Hutu tend to live as peasant farmers. 
Traditionally they have been dominated by the Tutsi minority; there is a 
long history of violent conflict between the two groups. The Hutu 
language belongs to the Bantu branch of the Niger-Congo family. 
 
Huxley 
Thomas Henry Huxley was an English biologist. He was born in 1825 at 
Ealing and died in 1895. He was an outspoken supporter of Darwin.  
 
Huygens 
Christiaan Huygens was a Dutch scientist. He was born in 1629 and died in 
1695. He invented the pendulum clock. 
 
Hycsos 
The Hycsos (Hykshos) or Shepherd Kings, were wandering tribes of Semitic 
descent who conquered Egypt in 2100BC and were driven out some five 
hundred years later. 
 
Hyder Ali 
Hyder Ali was a distinguisged Indian Prince. He was born in 1728 to a 
general in the service of the Rajah of Mysore. He died in 1782 during a 
war with the British. 
 
Hykshos 
see "Hycsos" 
 
Iban 
Iban is a replacement term for Dyak.  
 
Ibo 
The Ibo are a west African culture group occupying south east Nigeria and 
numbering about 18,000,000. Primarily cultivators, they inhabit the 
richly forested tableland, bounded by the river Niger to the west and the 
river Cross to the east. They are divided into five main groups, and 
their languages belong to the Kwa branch of the Niger-Congo family.  
 
Ibsen 
Henrik Ibsen was a Norwegian dramatist. He was born in 1828 at Skien and 
died in 1906.  
 
Ifugao 
The Ifugao are an indigenous people of north Luzon in the Philippines, 
numbering approximately 70,000. In addition to practising shifting 
cultivation on highland slopes, they build elaborate terraced rice 
fields. Their language belongs to the Austronesian family. The Ifugao 
live in scattered hamlets and traditionally recognise a class of nobles, 
kadangya, who are obliged to provide expensive feasts on particular 
social occasions. Although indigenous beliefs remain, many Ifugao have 
adopted Christianity.  
 
Ina 
Ina was King of the West Saxons. He ascended to the throne in 689. In 728 
he resigned his crown and went on pilgramage to Rome. 
 
Inca 
The Inca were an Indian tribe of Peru.  
 
Indulf 
Indulf was King of Scotland from 954 to 962.  
 
Ingres 
Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres was a French painter. He was born in 1780 
at Montauban and died in 1867. He drew fine pencil portraits. 
 
Inuit 
The Innuit are a people inhabiting the Arctic coasts of North America, 
the east islands of the Canadian Arctic, and the ice-free coasts of 
Greenland. Inuktitut, their language, has about 60,000 speakers; it 
belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut group. The Inuit object to the name Eskimos 
given them by the Algonquin Indians. 
 
Ireland 
John Ireland was an English composer. He was born in 1879 at Bowden and 
died in 1962. He wrote a lot of music for the piano.  
 
Irish 
The Irish are people of Irish culture from Ireland or person of Irish 
descent. The Irish mainly speak English, though there are approximately 
30,000-100,000 speakers of Irish Gaelic (see Gaelic language), a Celtic 
language belonging to the Indo-European family. 
Celtic tribes, the ancestors of the Irish, migrated to Ireland about 300 
BC. Later known as Gaels (Irishmen), they settled on the Isle of Man and 
south west Scotland, and established colonies in west Wales, Devon, and 
Cornwall. 
 
Iroquois 
The Iroquois were a confederacy of 6 north American Indian tribes 
including the Mohawks, Oneidas and Senecas. They lived on the shores of 
the Mohawk river, and spread through to the Mississippi. Their expansion 
was checked by white settlers who wiped out several of the tribes and 
imprisoned others on squalid reservations. 
 
Irving 
Sir Henry Irving was a British actor, and the first to be knighted. He 
was born in 1838 and died in 1905. Washington Irving was an American 
writer. He was born in 1783 at New York and died in 1859. 
 
Isherwood 
Christopher Isherwood is an Anglo-American novelist and playwright. He 
was born in 1904.  
 
Israeli 
An Israeli is an inhabitant of Israel.  
 
Jackson 
Thomas Jonathan Jackson was an American Confederate general. He was born 
in 1824 and died in 1863. He was nicknamed "stonewall".  
 
Jacobites 
The Jacobites were people who wanted the return of the Stuart monarchy 
after the expulsion of James II by William III.  
 
James 
James was King of Scotland from 1424 to 1437. James was King of England 
from 1603 to 1625. Henry James was an american writer. He was born in 
1843 and died in 1916. William James was an American psychologist. He was 
born in 1842 and died in 1910.  
 
James II 
James II was King of Scotland from 1437 to 1460. James II was King of 
England from 1685 to 1688.  
 
James III 
James III was King of Scotland from 1460 to 1488. 
 
James IV 
James IV was King of Scotland from 1488 to 1513.  
 
James V 
James V was King of Scotland from 1513 to 1542. 
 
James VI 
James VI was King of Scotland from 1567 to 1625.  
 
Janszoon 
William Janszoon was a Dutch explorer. He discovered Australia in 1606. 
 
Jat 
The Jat are an ethnic group living in Pakistan and north India, and 
numbering about 11 million; they are the largest group in north India. 
The Jat are predominantly farmers. They speak Punjabi, a language 
belonging to the Iranian branch of the Indo-European family. They are 
thought to be related to the Romany people.  
 
Javanese 
The Javanese are the largest ethnic group in the Republic of Indonesia. 
There are more than 50 million speakers of Javanese, which belongs to the 
western branch of the Austronesian family. Although the Javanese have a 
Hindu-Buddhist heritage, they are today predominantly Muslim, practising 
a branch of Islam known as Islam Jawa, which contains many Sufi features 
In pre-independence Indonesia, Javanese society was divided into 
hierarchical classes ruled by sultans, and differences in status were 
reflected by strict codes of dress. Arts and crafts flourished at the 
court. Although the majority of Javanese depend on the cultivation of 
rice in irrigated fields, there are many large urban centers with 
developing industries. 
 
Jeans 
Sir James Jeans wrote many popular books on astronomy. He was born in 
1877 at Ormskirk and died in 1946.  
 
Jefferies 
John Richard Jefferies was an English essayist and naturalist. He was 
born in 1848 near Swindown and died in 1883.  
 
Jefferson 
Thomas Jefferson was the third President of the USA. He was born in 1743 
and died in 1826.  
 
Jenner 
Sir Edward Jenner was an English physician. He was born in 1749 at 
Berkeley and died in 1823. He developed a vaccine for smallpox from 
cowpox, and thus created the concept of innoculation through mild 
infection to allow the body's immune system to develope strength against 
a particular virus. 
 
Jew 
The Jews are a Semitic race of people also known as the Hebrews and 
Israelites. Their early history is identified with Palestine, now Israel. 
The Jewish history is recorded in the Old Testament.  
 
Jewish 
see "Jew" 
 
Jews 
see "Jew" 
 
Jivaro 
The jivaro are a tribe of east Ecuador and north Peru.  
 
John 
John was King of England from 1199 to 1216. Augustus Edwin John was a 
British portrait painter. He was born in 1878 at Tenby and died in 1961.  
 
Johnny Rotten 
see "Lydon" 
 
Johnson 
Samuel Johnson was an English writer. He was born in 1709 and died in 
1784. He was twice imprisoned for debt. 
 
John Baliol 
John Baliol was King of Scotland from 1292 to 1296. 
 
Jones 
Inigo Jones was an English architect. He was born in 1573 and died in 
1652. 
 
Jongkind 
Johan Barthold Jongkind was a Dutch artist. He was born in 1819 at Latrop 
and died in 1891. 
 
Jonson 
Benjamin Jonson was a rival poet and dramatist to Shakespeare. He was 
born in 1572 and died in 1637.  
 
Jordaens 
Jacob Jordaens was a Dutch artist. He was born in 1593 at Antwerp and 
died in 1678. 
 
Joule 
James Prescott Joule was an English scientist. He was born in 1818 at 
Salford and died in 1889. He studied the relationship between heat and 
mechanical work. 
 
Joyce 
James Joyce was an Irish writer. He was born in 1882 at Dublin and died 
in 1941. He wrote Ulysses and Finnegan's Wake.  
 
Ju 
The Ju are the bushmen people of Botswana.  
 
Jung 
Carl Gustav Jung was a Swiss scientist. He was born at Basle in 1875. He 
died in 1961. He is famous for developing a school of analytical 
psychology. 
 
Justice Of The Peace 
A Justice Of The Peace or JP is an unpaid magistrate who is not a lawyer. 
The office dates back to Edward I.  
 
Justinian 
Justinian was Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, Byzantium. He was born 
in 483 and died in 565. 
 
Jutes 
The Jutes were a Germanic tribe which settled in Kent and the Isle of 
Wight, England in AD 449. 
 
Juvenal 
Juvenal was a Roman satirist. He was born in 60 and died in 140.  
 
Kabyle 
The Kabyle are a group of Berber peoples of Algeria and Tunisia. They 
served as Zouave in the colonial French forces. Many Kabyles were notable 
in the fight for Algerian independence 1954-62. Their language belongs to 
the Afro-Asiatic family.  
 
Kafka 
Franz Kafka was a Czech writer. He was born in 1883 at Prague and died in 
1924. 
 
Kandinsky 
Wassily Kandinsky was a Russian artist. He was born in 1866 at Moscow and 
died in 1944. 
 
Kant 
Immanuel Kant was a German philosopher. He was born at Konigsberg in 1724 
and died in 1804. He wrote "Critique of Pure Reason" and "Critique of 
Practical Reason".  
 
Karen 
The Karen are a group of south east Asian peoples, numbering 1.9 million. 
They live in east Myanmar (formerly Burma), Thailand, and the Irrawaddy 
delta. Their language belongs to the Thai division of the Sino-Tibetan 
family.  
 
Kashmiri 
The Kashmiri are native to the state of Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
Kauffman 
Angelica Kauffman was a Swiss painter. She was born in 1741 and died in 
1807. 
 
Kazakh 
The Kazakh are a pastoral Kyrgyz people of Kazakhstan. Kazakhs also live 
in China (Xinjiang, Gansu, and Qinghai), Mongolia, and Afghanistan. There 
are 5-7 million speakers of Kazakh, a Turkic language belonging to the 
Altaic family. They are predominantly Sunni Muslim, although pre-Islamic 
customs have survived. 
Kazakhs herd horses and make use of camels; they also keep cattle. 
Traditionally the Kazakhs lived in tents and embarked on seasonal 
migrations in search of fresh pastures. Collectivized herds were 
established in the 1920s and 1930s. 
 
Kean 
Edmund Kean was an English actor. He was born in 1789 at London and died 
in 1833. 
 
Keats 
John Keats was an English poet. He was born in London in 1795 and died in 
1821. 
 
Kekule 
Kekule was a German scientist. He was born in 1829 at Darmstadt and died 
in 1896. He worked on the structure of carbon compounds. 
 
Kelvin 
William Thomson Kelvin was a professor of Natural Philosophy at Glasgow. 
He was born in 1824 at Belfast and died in 1907. He determined the 
absolute zero of temperature. 
 
Kenneth 
Kenneth was King of Scotland from 843 to 860. 
 
Kenneth II 
Kenneth II was King of Scotland from 971 to 995.  
 
Kenneth III 
Kenneth III was King of Scotland from 997 to 1005.  
 
Kepler 
Johann Kepler was a German astronomer. He was born in 1571 near Stuttgart 
and died in 1630. He studied the motion of planets and proved that 
planets move in an elliptical path with the sun at one focus.  
 
Khachaturyan 
Aram Khachaturyan is a Soviet composer. He was born in 1904 at Tiflis.  
 
Khmer 
The Khmer are the largest ethnic group in Cambodia, numbering about 7 
million. Khmer minorities also live in east Thailand and south Vietnam. 
The Khmer language belongs to the Mon-Khmer family of Austro-Asiatic 
languages. 
The Khmers live mainly in agricultural and fishing villages under a 
chief. They practise Theravada Buddhism and trace descent through both 
male and female lines. Traditionally, Khmer society was divided into six 
groups: the royal family, the Brahmans (who officiated at royal 
festivals), Buddhist monks, officials, commoners, and slaves. 
 
Khoikhoi 
The Khoikhoi (formerly Hottentot) are a people living in Namibia and the 
Cape Province of South Africa, and numbering about 30,000. Their language 
is related to San (spoken by the Kung) and belongs to the Khoisan family. 
Like the Kung, the Khoikhoi once inhabited a wider area, but were driven 
into the Kalahari Desert by invading Bantu peoples and Dutch colonists in 
the 18th century. They live as nomadic hunter-gatherers, in family 
groups, and have animist beliefs.  
 
Kierkegaard 
Kierkegaard was a Danish philosopher. He was born in 1813 at Copenhagen 
and died in 1855. 
 
Kikuyu 
The Kikuyu are an aboriginal people of central Kenya. 
 
Kim Philby 
Harold "Kim" Philby was a high-level British diplomat and a senior 
intelligence officer. He defected to the Russians in 1963. 
 
King 
A King is a male sovereign ruler of an independent state. 
 
Kingsley 
Charles Kingsley was an English writer. He was born in 1819 at Holme and 
died in 1875. He wrote Westward Ho! and The Water Babies.  
 
Kipling 
Rudyard Kipling was an Indian writer. He was born in 1865 at Bombay of 
Britsh parents. He died in 1936. He wrote The Jungle Book. 
 
Kirghiz 
The Kirghiz are a pastoral people numbering approximately 1.5 million. 
They inhabit the central Asian region bounded by the Hindu Kush, the 
Himalayas, and the Tian Shan mountains. The Kirghiz are Sunni Muslims, 
and their Turkic language belongs to the Altaic family. 
The Kirghiz live in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, China (Xinjiang), 
and Afghanistan (Wakhan corridor). 
The highest political authority is traditionally entitled khan. During 
the winter the Kirghiz live in individual family yurts. In summer they 
come together in larger settlements of up to 20 yurts. They herd sheep, 
goats, and yaks, and use Bactrian camels for transporting their 
possessions.  
 
Kitchener 
Horatio Herbert Kitchener was a British military leader. He was born in 
1850 and died in 1916 on board the HMS Hampshire when the ship struck a 
mine and sank. He was commander-in-chief during the Boer war. He was 
secretary for war during the Great War.  
 
Klee 
Paul Klee was a Swiss painter. He was born in 1879 near Berne and died in 
1940. 
 
Kneller 
Sir Godfrey Kneller was an Anglo-German artist. He was born in 1646 at 
Lubeck and died in 1723. He settled in England in 1674.  
 
Knox 
John Knox was a Scottish reformer and preacher. He was born in 1505 at 
Giffordgate and died in 1572.  
 
Koch 
Robert Koch was a German scientist. He was born in 1843 and died in 1910. 
He won the Nobel proze for medicine for discovering the bacteria which 
cause TB, cholera and anthrax. 
 
Kodaly 
Zoltan Kodaly was a Hungarian composer. He was born in 1882 and died in 
1967. 
 
Kokoschka 
Oskar Kokoschka was an Austrian painter. He was born in 1886. 
 
Komi 
The Komi are a Finnish people living mainly in the tundra and coniferous 
forests of the autonomous republic of Komi in the north west Urals, 
Russia. They raise livestock, grow timber, and mine coal and oil. Their 
language, Zyryan, belongs to the Finno-Ugric branch of the Uralic family.  
 
Kreisler 
Fritz Kreisler was an Austrian violinist. He was born in 1875 and died in 
1962. 
 
Kung 
The Kung (formerly Bushman) are a small group of hunter-gatherer peoples 
of the north east Kalahari, southern Africa, still living to some extent 
nomadically. Their language belongs to the Khoisan family.  
 
Kurd 
The Kurds are the Kurdish culture, living mostly in the Taurus and Sagros 
mountains of west Iran and north Iraq in the region called Kurdistan. 
The Kurdish languages (Kurmanji, Sorani Kurdish, Gurano, and Zaza) are 
members of the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family, and the 
Kurds are a non-Arab, non-Turkic ethnic group. The Kurds are 
predominantly Sunni Muslims, although there are some Shiites in Iran. 
Kurds traditionally owe allegiance to their families, and larger groups 
are brought together under an agha, or lord. They are predominantly 
shepherds and farmers, cultivating a wide range of crops and fruit. 
National dress is still worn in the more mountainous regions and there is 
a strong tradition of poetry and music. Kurdish professionals are found 
in many Middle Eastern cities.  
 
La Fontaine 
Jean de La Fontaine was a French poet. He was born in 1621 and died in 
1695. He wrote a number of popular fables. 
 
Labourite 
A Labourite is a member of the British Labour Party.  
 
Laennec 
Rene Theophile Hyacinthe Laennec was a French physician who invented the 
stethoscope. He was born in 1781 and died in 1826. 
 
Laforgue 
Jules Laforgue was a French poet. He was born in 1860 and died in 1887. 
He was a pioneer of free verse. 
 
Laing 
R.d. Laing was a Scottish psychoanalyst. He originated some radical 
methods of psychiatry.  
 
Lamarck 
Jean Baptiste Lamarck was a French naturalist. He was born in 1744 at 
Picardy and died in 1829. He catalogued invertebrates.  
 
Lamb 
Charles Lamb was an English poet. He was born in 1775 at London and died 
in 1834. He wrote essays under the name of Elia. 
 
Landor 
Walter Savage Landor was an English poet. He was born in 1775 at Warwick 
and died in 1864. He raised a private regiment to fight against Napoleon 
in Spain. 
 
Landseer 
Sir Edwin Henry Landseer was an English painter. He was born in 1802 at 
London and died in 1873. He was knighted in 1850. Typically he painted 
pictures of animals. 
 
Langland 
William Langland was probably an English priest. He was born in 1332 and 
died in 1400. He is remembered for his poem The Visions of Piers The 
Plowman which gives a detailed account of English life at the time. 
 
Lanista 
A lanista was a man who purchased and looked after gladiators.  
 
Lansbury 
George Lansbury was a British politician and leader of the Parliamentary 
Labour Party from 1931 until 1935. He was born in 1859 and died in 1940. 
 
Lao 
The Lao are a people who live along the Mekong river system in Laos (2 
million) and north Thailand (9 million). The Lao language is a member of 
the Sino-Tibetan family. The majority of Lao live in rural villages. 
During the wet season, May-Oct, they grow rice in irrigated fields, 
though some shifting or swidden cultivation is practised on hillsides. 
Vegetables and other crops are grown during drier weather. The Lao are 
predominantly Buddhist though a belief in spirits, phi, is included in 
Lao devotions. There are some Christians among the minority groups. 
 
Lao Tsze 
Lao Tsze was a Chinese philosopher who wrote the Tao Te Ching. He lived 
around 590BC. 
 
Laotian 
The Laotian are an Indochinese people who live along the Mekong river 
system. There are approximately 9 million Laotians in Thailand and 2 
million in Laos. The Laotian language is a Thai member of the Sino-
Tibetan family. 
 
Laplace 
Pierre Simon Laplace was a French mathematician and astronomer. He was 
born in 1749 at Beaumont-en Auge. He argued that the whole physical 
universe could be explained by the law of cause and effect so that, given 
enough information, both the past and the future of the universe could be 
determined in every detail.  
 
Latimer 
Hugh Latimer was an English protestant martyr. He was born in 1485 near 
Leicester and died in 1555. He was burnt at the stake in Oxford for being 
a heretic.  
 
Latins 
The Latins were an ancient people of Latium. In very early times the 
Latins formed a league of thirty cities of which the town of Alba Longa 
became the head. As Rome was a colony of Alba Longa, the Romans spoke the 
language of the Latins, which was Latin. 
 
Laud 
William Laud was an English churchman. He was born in 1573 at Reading and 
died in 1645. He was made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1633. 
 
Lauder 
Sir Harry Lauder was a Scottish variety actor. He was born in 1870 at 
Portobello and died in 1950.  
 
Laval 
Pierre Laval was a French statesman. He was twice Prime Minister during 
the 1930s. He was born in 1883 and died in 1945.  
 
Lavoisier 
Antoine Laurent Lavoisier was a French scientist. He was born in 1743 at 
Paris and died in 1794. He proved the modern theory of combustion. 
 
Lawrence 
David Herbert Lawrence was an English poet and novelist. He was born in 
1885 at Nottinghamshire and died in 1930. Thomas Edward Lawrence was a 
British soldier and author. He was born in 1888 near Snowdon and died in 
1935. He was known as "Lawrence of Arabia" for his exploits encouraging 
the Arabs to fight against the Turks durong the Great War.  
 
Le Carre 
John Le Carre is the pen name of David John Cornwell, a British author of 
spy novels which include "The Spy Who Came in from the Cold" and 
"Smiley's People". He was born in 1931.  
 
Le Corbusier 
Charles Jeanneret (Le Corbusier) was a Swiss architect and artist. He was 
born in 1887 and died in 1965.  
 
Le Duc Tho 
Le Duc Tho is a Vietnamese diplomat. He was born in 1911. He was joint 
winner of the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts in negotiating an end to 
the Vietnam War in 1973.  
 
Le Fanu 
Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu was an Irish writer of novels and short stories. 
He was born in 1814 and died in 1873.  
 
Lear 
Edward Lear was an English painter and writer of verse. He was born in 
1812 at London and died in 1888. He taught drawing to Queen Victoria, but 
he is remembered for his work A Book of Nonsense, published in 1846. 
 
Leavis 
Frank Raymond Leavis was a British literary critic. He was born in 1895 
and died in 1978. 
 
Lebedev 
Peter Nikolaievich Lebedev was a Russian physicist. he was born in 1866 
and died in 1912. He demonstrated that light exherts minute pressure upon 
a physical body.  
 
Leclanche 
Georges Leclanche was a French engineer. he was born in 1839 and died in 
1882. In 1866 he invented a primary electrical cell which still forms the 
basis for most dry batteries.  
 
Leconte de Lisle 
Charles Marie Rene Leconte de Lisle was a French poet. He was born in 
1818 and died in 1894.  
 
Lee 
Robert E. Lee was an American Confederate General. He was born in 1807 
and died in 1870. 
Bruce Lee was the stage name of Lee Yuen Kam, a Chinese actor and expert 
in Kung Fu who popularised the martial arts in the west.  
 
Lee Yuen Kam 
Lee Yuen Kam was the real name of Bruce Lee, the actor. 
 
Leeuwenhoek 
Antony Van Leeuwenhoek was a Dutch scientist. He was born in 1632 and 
died in 1723. He was the first person to see and describe bacteria which 
he did using a self-made microscope. 
 
Leger 
Fernand Leger was a French painter. He was born in 1881 and died in 1955. 
 
Lehar 
Franz Lehar was a Hungarian composer. He was born in 1870 and died in 
1948. 
 
Leibniz 
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was a German philosopher. He was born in 1646 
at Leipzig and died in 1716. He wrote Monadology and Principles Of 
Nature. He discovered calculus.  
 
Leicester 
Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, was an Elizabethan courtier and English 
soldier. He was born in 1532 and died in 1588.  
 
Leighton 
Frederick Baron Leighton was an English artist. He was born in 1830 at 
Scarborough and died in 1896. He was president of the Royal Academy in 
1878. 
 
Lely 
Sir Peter Lely was a Dutch born painter. He was born in 1618 and died in 
1680. He came to England in 1641 as a portrait painter.  
 
Lenin 
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin was a Russian revolutionary. He was born in 1870 at 
Simbirsk and died in 1924.  
 
Lenni Lenape 
see "Delaware Indians" 
 
Leonardo da Vinci 
Leonardo da Vinci was an Italian artist and scientist. He was born in 
1452, dying in 1519. He recorded scientific studies in unpublished note 
books. He designed the first helicopter (on paper) and recorded 
anatomical details after carrying out dissections.  
 
Leoncavallo 
Ruggiero Leoncavallo was an Italian composer. He was born in 1858, dying 
in 1919. He composed the opera pagliacci.  
 
Leonidas 
Leonidas was the King of Sparta when Greece was invaded by Xerxes in 
480bc. He was killed in battle at thermopylae. 
 
Leper 
Leper is a term given to a person suffering from the disease leprosy. 
 
Lepers 
see "Leper" 
 
Leucippus 
Leucippus was a Greek philosopher. He lived around 430BC. 
 
Levellers 
The Levellers were a Puritan group led by John Lilburne who fought for 
equality in social and religious matters.  
 
Lewis 
Sinclair Lewis was an American novelist. He was born in 1885 and died in 
1951.  
 
Li Po 
Li Po was a Chinese poet born in 700bc. He died by drowning.  
 
Lilienthal 
Otto Lilienthal was a German inventor. He was born in 1848 at Auklam and 
died in 1896. He was one of the founders of the science of flight and 
conducted important work into gliding. 
 
Lincoln 
Abraham Lincoln was the 16th President of the USA. He was born in 1809 at 
Kentucky and died in 1865 when he was assassinated at a theatre by John 
Wilkes Booth. 
 
Lindbergh 
Charles A. Lindbergh is an American airman. He was born in 1902 at 
Minnesota. He made the first non-stop flight between New York and Paris 
in 1927. 
 
Linnaeus 
Carl von Linne Linnaeus was a Swedish naturalist. He was born in 1707 at 
Rashut and died in 1778. He invented the modern system of naming plants 
with two words, rather than long descriptive latin phrases which was 
previously used.  
 
Lippi 
Fra Filippo Lippi was an Italian painter. He was born at Florence in 
1406. He died in 1469. He painted the frescoes in the prato cathedral. 
 
Lister 
Joseph Lister was an English doctor. He was born at Upton (Essex) in 
1827. He died in 1912. He introduced carbolic acid to prevent infection. 
 
Liszt 
Franz Liszt was a Hungarian composer born at Dobr'jan in 1811. He died in 
1886. He was also a pianist.  
 
Lithuanian 
A Lithuanian is a member of the majority ethnic group living in 
Lithuania, comprising 80% of the population.  
 
Livingstone 
David Livingstone was a Scottish explorer. Between 1852 and 1873 he 
discovered the course of the zambesi, victoria falls and lake nyasa.  
 
Livy 
Livy was a Roman historian. He was born in 59BC at Padua and died in 17.  
 
Lloyd-George 
David Lloyd-George was an English MP. He was born in 1863 at Manchester 
and died in 1945. He was elected to Parliament in 1890. He was Chancellor 
of the Exchequer in 1908. 
 
Lobachevski 
Lobachevski was a Russian mathematician. He was born in 1793 and died in 
1856. He pioneered the study of non-Euclidean geometry.  
 
Locke 
John Locke was an English political author. He was born in 1632 at 
Wrington and died in 1704. 
Matthew Locke was an English composer. He was born in 1630 at Exeter and 
died in 1677.  
 
London 
Jack London was an American writer. He was born in 1876 at San Francisco 
and died in 1916. He wrote The Call of the Wild and White Fang.  
 
Longfellow 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was an American poet. He was born in 1807 at 
Portland and died in 1882.  
 
Lorca 
Federico Garcia Lorca was a Spanish poet and dramatist. He was born in 
1899 and died in 1936 when he was shot for supporting the Republican 
Government by Franco's troops.  
 
Lorentz 
Hendrick Antoon Lorentz was a Dutch scientist. He was born in 1853 and 
died in 1928. He shared the Nobel prize for physics in 1902. 
 
Louis IX 
Louis IX was King of France. He was born in 1214, dying in 1270 whilst on 
crusade.  
 
Louis XIV 
Louis XIV was King of France. He was born in 1638, dying in 1715. 
 
Louis XV 
Louis XV was King of France. He was born in 1710, dying in 1774.  
 
Louis XVI 
Louis XVI was King of France. He was born in 1754, dying in 1793 when he 
was executed during the French revolution. 
 
Lovelace 
Richard Lovelace was an Englsh poet and lyricist. He was born in 1618 and 
died in 1657. 
 
Lucretius 
Lucretius was a Roman poet. He was born in 99BC and died in 55BC. 
 
Lully 
Jean Baptiste Lully was a French composer. He was born in 1632 at 
Florence and died in 1687.  
 
Luo 
The Luo are the second-largest ethnic group of Kenya, living in the Lake 
Victoria region and in 1987 numbering some 2,650,000. 
The Luo traditionally live by farming livestock. The Luo language is of 
the Nilo-Saharan family. 
 
Luther 
Martin Luther was a German Protestant Reformer and translator of the 
bible. He was born in 1483 at Saxony and died in 1546. 
 
Lydon 
John Lydon (aka Johnny Rotten) was lead singer with the punk rock group 
the Sex Pistols, and then after they split up with Public Image Ltd.  
 
Lytton 
Edward George Bulwer Lytton was an English writer and statesman. He was 
born in 1803 at London and died in 1873. He wrote The Last Days Of 
Pompeii. 
 
MacArthur 
Douglas macArthur was an American general. He was born in 1880, dying in 
1964. He defended the philippines against the japanese during the second 
world war. In 1951 he was relieved of command during the korean war.  
 
Macaulay 
Thomas Babington Macaulay was a British historian and politician. He was 
born in 1800 at Leicestershire and died in 1859. He entered parliament in 
1830. He became Secretary for War in 1839. 
 
Macbeth 
Macbeth was King of Scotland from 1040 to 1057. 
 
Macdonald 
Flora Macdonald was a Scottish heroine. She was born in 1722 and died in 
1790. She helped Prince Charles Edward Stuart to escape after the battle 
of Culloden. 
James Ramsay Macdonald was a Britsh politician. He was born in 1866 
atLossiemouth and died in 1937. In 1911 he became leader of the Labour 
party.  
 
Machiavelli 
Niccolo Machiavelli was an Italian statesman and writer. He was born in 
1469 at Florence and died in 1527. He has the reputation of being 
manipulative, hence the psychological term "Machiavellism" which refers 
to manipulation of people.  
 
Macmillan 
Harold Macmillan was a British Conservative statesman. He was born in 
1894. He became an MP in 1924. He became Prime Minister in 1957 following 
Eden's resignation over the Suez canal crisis.  
 
Maeterlinck 
Count Maurice Maeterlinck was a Belgian writer and dramatist. He was born 
in 1862 at Ghent and died in 1949.  
 
Magellan 
Ferdinand Magellan was a Portugese sailor. He was born in 1480 at Sabrosa 
and died in 1521. He discovered the straight of Magellan. 
 
Magistrate 
A Magistrate is a "junior judge", they serve in lower courts of law and 
hear minor offences.  
 
Mahler 
Gustav Mahler was a Czech-Austrian composer. He was born in 1860 at 
Kalischt and died in 1911.  
 
Makua 
The Makua are a people living to the north of the Zambezi River in 
Mozambique. With the Lomwe people, they make up the country's largest 
ethnic group. The Makua are mainly farmers, 
living in villages ruled by chiefs. The Makua language belongs to the 
Niger-Congo family, and has about 5 million speakers.  
 
Malagasy 
A Malagasy is an inhabitant of or native to Madagascar. The Malagasy 
language has about 9 million speakers; it belongs to the Austronesian 
family. 
Despite Madagascar's proximity to Africa, Malagasy contains only a small 
number of Bantu and Arabic loan words. It seems likely that the earliest 
settlers came by sea, some 1,500 years ago, from Indonesia. Primarily 
rice farmers, the Malagasy make use both of irrigated fields and swidden 
(temporary plot) methods. 
 
Malcolm 
Malcolm was King of Scotland from 943 to 954. 
 
Malcolm II 
Malcolm II was King of Scotland from 1005 to 1034.  
 
Malcolm III 
Malcolm III was King of Scotland from 1057 to 1093. 
 
Malcom IV 
Malcolm IV was King of Scotland from 1153 to 1165.  
 
Mallarme 
Stephane Mallarme was a French poet. He was born in 1842 at Paris and 
died in 1898. He founded the Symbolists school of poetry. 
 
Malory 
Sir Thomas Malory was an English writer. He lived around 1450. He wrote 
Le Morte d'Arthur about King Arthur.  
 
Malthus 
Thomas Robert Malthus was an English economist. He was born in 1766 near 
Guildford and died in 1834. He wrote The Essay on Population.  
 
Mameluke 
The Mameluke were Turkoman warriors taken to Egypt as slaves to act as 
bodyguards for the caliphs and sultans. When the Ottoman Turks conquered 
Egypt in 1250 the Mamelukes became sultans. They were defeated by 
Napoleon in 1798 and the survivors were massacred by Muhammad Ali in 1811 
 
Manet 
Edouard Manet was a French painter. He was born in 1832 at Paris and died 
in 1883.  
 
Mann 
Thomas Mann was a German novelist. He was born in 1875 at Lubeck and died 
in 1955. He won the Nobel prize for literature in 1929. 
 
Mantegna 
Andrea Mantegna was an Italian painter and engraver. He was born in 1431 
and died in 1506.  
 
Mao Tse-Tung 
Mao Tse-Tung was a Chinese revolutionary leader. He was born in 1893 at 
Kunan Province. He was a founder member of the Chinese Communist party. 
 
Maori 
The Maori are a Polynesian people of pre-European New Zealand. 
Their language, Maori, belongs to the eastern branch of the Austronesian 
family. 
The Maori colonized New Zealand from about 850, establishing a 
flourishing civilization 
throughout the country. 
 
Marat 
Jean Paul Marat was a French revolutionary and scientist. He was born in 
1743 at Boudry and died in 1793 when he was murdered in his bath by 
Charlotte Corday.  
 
Marc 
Franz Marc was a German painter. He was born in 1880 and died in 1916 at 
Verdun during the Great War. 
 
Marco Polo 
Marco Polo was a Venetian explorer. He was born in 1254 and died in 1324. 
 
Marconi 
Guglielmo Marconi was an Italian scientist. He was born in 1874 at 
Bologna and died in 1937. He invented the wireless set. In 1901 he sent a 
wireless signal between Cornwall and Newfoundland. 
 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was a Roman Emperor. He was born in 121 and 
died in 180.  
 
Margaret 
Margaret was queen of Scotland from 1286 to 1290. 
 
Marie Antoinette 
Marie Antoinette was Queen of Louis XVI of France. She was born in 1755 
and died in 1793 when she was executed for treason during the French 
revolution.  
 
Marlborough 
John Churchill (Duke of Marlborough) was an English soldier. He was born 
in 1650 at Musbury and died in 1722. He commanded the British and Dutch 
forces against France in 1702. 
 
Marlowe 
Christopher Marlowe was an English dramatist. He was born in 1564 at 
Canterbury and died in 1593. 
 
Maroon 
The Maroon were escaped slaves in Jamaica who were armed by the Spanish 
to attack the British forces on the island during the late 17th and 18th 
centuries. They lived mainly in the mountainous region now known as 
cockpit country and developed a method of cooking known as "jerking" 
peculiar to Jamaica.  
 
Marshall 
General George Marshall was an American General and statesman. He was 
born in 1880 and died in 1959. He was chief of staff during the second 
World War. 
 
Martini 
Simone Martini was an Italian painter. He was born in 1283 and died in 
1344.  
 
Marvell 
Andrew Marvell was a poet. He was born in 1621, dying in 1678.  
 
Marx 
Karl Heinrich Marx was a German philosopher and economist. He was born in 
1818 at the Rhineland and died in 1883. Together with Engels he wrote the 
manifesto of the communist party in 1847. 
 
Mary 
Mary was queen of Scotland from 1542 to 1567. Mary was queen of England 
from 1553 to 1558.  
 
Mary Godwin 
see "shelley" 
 
Mary II 
Mary II was queen of England from 1689 to 1694. 
 
Masaccio 
Masaccio was an Italian painter. He was born in 1401 and died in 1428.  
 
Masai 
The Masai are an east African people whose territory is divided between 
Tanzania and Kenya, and who number about 250,000. They were originally 
warriors and nomads, breeding humped zebu cattle, but some have adopted a 
more settled life. They speak a Nilotic language belonging to the Nilo-
Saharan family. 
 
Masaryk 
Thomas Garrigue Masaryk was the founder and first President of 
Czechoslovakia. He was born in 1850 at Moravia and died in 1937. 
 
Masefield 
John Masefield was an English writer. He was born in 1878 at Ledbury and 
died in 1967.  
 
Matisse 
Henri Matisse was a French painter. He was born in 1869 at Le Cateau and 
died in 1954.  
 
Maugham 
William Somerset Maugham was an English novelist. He was born in 1874 at 
Paris and died in 1965.  
 
Maupassant 
Guy de Maupassant was a French writer. He was born in 1850 at Fecamp and 
died in 1893. He primarily wrote short stories.  
 
Mauriac 
Francois Mauriac was a French novelist. He was born in 1885 and died in 
1970. 
 
Maurice Sarrail 
Maurice Sarrail was a French General. He Was born in 1856 at Carcassonne. 
He commanded the French 3rd army in 1914 during the Great War and was 
responsible for the defence of the Verdun region. In 1925 he became High 
Commissioner of Syria. 
 
Maxim 
Sir Hiram Stevens Maxim was an American inventor. He was born in 1840 at 
Sangerville and died in 1916. He invented the automatic quick-firing gun 
(machine gun).  
 
Maxwell 
James Clerk Maxwell was a Scottish mathematician. He was born in 1831 at 
Edinburgh and died in 1879. He created an elctro-magnetic theory of 
light. 
 
Mazarin 
Jules mazarin was a cardinal and French minister. He was born in italy in 
1602, dying in 1661.  
 
Mazeppa 
Ivan Stepanovich Mazeppa was a Cossack nobelman. He was born in 1644, 
dying in 1709. He fought for independance for the Ukraine from Russia.  
 
Mazzini 
Giuseppe Mazzini was an Italian republican patriot and revolutionary. He 
was born in 1805 at Genoa and died in 1872.  
 
McGeoch 
John McGeoch is guitar player with the rock group Public Image Ltd  
 
Meleager 
Meleager was an ancient Greek poet who wrote epigrams.  
 
Melville 
Herman Melville was an American writer. He was born in 1819 at New York 
and died in 1891. He wrote Moby Dick. 
 
Memling 
Hans Memling was a Flemish religious painter. He was born in 1430 and 
died in 1494. 
 
Mende 
The Mende are a west African people living in the rainforests of central 
east Sierra Leone and west 
Liberia. They number approximately 1 million. The Mende are farmers as 
well as hunter- 
gatherers, and each of their villages is led by a chief and a group of 
elders. The Mende 
language belongs to the Niger-Congo family. 
 
Mendel 
Gregor Johann Mendel was an Austrian priest and natural historian. He was 
born in 1822 at Mahren and died in 1884.  
 
Mendeleyev 
Dmitri Ivanovitch Mendeleyev was a Russian scientist. He was born in 1834 
at Tobolsk and died in 1907. He discovered that characteristic properties 
of chemical elements recur in regular cycles in a table starting with the 
element of lowest atomic weight and progressing consecutively in order of 
weight. 
 
Mendelssohn 
Felix Mendelssohn was a German composer. He was born in 1809 at Hamburg 
and died in 1847. 
 
Mercator 
Geradus Mercator was a Flemish geographer and cartographer. He was born 
in 1512 and died in 1594. He devised a new method of projecting the 
surface of the earth on a map which made navigation much simpler. 
 
Meredith 
George Meredith was an English novelist. He was born in 1828 at 
Portsmouth and died in 1909.  
 
Merlin 
Merlin was a magician who aided Arthur. 
 
Meskhetian 
The Meskhetian are a community of Turkish descent that formerly inhabited 
Meskhetia, on the then 
Turkish-Soviet border. 
 
Michelangelo 
Buonarroti Michelangelo was an Italian painter. He was born in 1475 at 
Caprese and died in 1564. He painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.  
 
Michelson 
Albert Abraham Michelson was an American scientist. He was born in 1852 
and died in 1931. He proved the existence of an all pervading ether and 
experimented to find out the speed of light.  
 
Middleton 
Thomas Middleton was an English dramatist. He was born in 1570 and died 
in 1627. He is know for his realistic comedies and romantic plays.  
 
Mikhail Fokine 
Mikhail Fokine was a Russian dancer. He was born at St Petersburg in 
1880. He died in 1942. He is famous for his work with ballet.  
 
Mill 
John Stuart Mill was an English economist. He was born in 1806 at London 
and died in 1873. He defended the rights of the working class and 
supported the right of women to vote.  
 
Millais 
Sir John Everett Millais was an English painter. He was born in 1829 at 
Southampton and died in 1896. 
 
Miller 
Arthur Miller is an American playwright. He was born in 1915. He wrote 
Death of a Salesman. 
 
Millet 
Jean Francois Millet was a French painter. He was born in 1814 near 
Greville and died in 1875.  
 
Millikan 
Robert Andrews Millikan was an American scientist. He was born in 1868 at 
Morrison and died in 1954. He won the Nobel prize for physics in 1923.  
 
Milton 
John Milton was an English writer. He was born in 1608 at London and died 
in 1674. He wrote Paradise Lost.  
 
Minangkabau 
Minangkabau are an Indonesian people of west Sumatra. In addition to 
approximately 3 million Minangkabau in west Sumatra, there are sizeable 
communities in the major Indonesian cities. The Minangkabau language 
belongs to the Austronesian family. 
 
Mirabeau 
Mirabeau was a French orator. He was born in 1749 and died in 1791. 
 
Miskito 
The Miskito are an American Indian people of Central America, living 
mainly in the area that is 
now Nicaragua.  
 
Modigliani 
Amedeo Modigliani was an Italian painter. He was born in 1884 at Leghorn 
and died in 1920.  
 
Modocs 
The Modocs are an American Indian tribe. They lived on the south shore of 
Klamath Lake in California. 
 
Moeso-Goths 
The Moeso-Goths were a tribe of Goths who settled in Moesia on the Lower 
Danube and devoted themselves to architecture under the protection of the 
Roman emperors.  
 
Mohammed 
Mohammed (Mahomet, Mehmet, Muhammad) was the founder of the religion of 
Islam. He was born in 570 at Mecca and died in 632. 
 
Mohawk 
The Mohawk are a North American Indian people, part of the Iroquois 
confederation, who lived in 
the Mohawk Valley, New York, and now live on reservations in Ontario, 
Quebec, and New 
York State, as well as among the general population. Their language 
belongs to the Macro- 
Siouan group. 
 
Mohican 
The Mohican are a North American Indian people, speaking an Algonquian 
language, who 
formerly occupied the Hudson Valley. 
 
Moliere 
Jean Baptiste Poquelin (Moliere) was a French dramatist. He was born in 
1622 and died in 1673.  
 
Moltke 
Helmuth Johannes Ludwig Von Moltke was a Prussian general. He was born in 
1848 and died in 1916. He invented the German plan of campaign for the 
Great War. 
 
Mon 
The Mon are a minority ethnic group living in the Irrawaddy delta region 
of lower Myanmar 
(Burma) and Thailand. The Mon language belongs to the Mon-Khmer branch of 
the Austro-Asiatic family. They are 
Buddhists, but also retain older animist beliefs. 
 
Monck 
George Monck was an English soldier. He was born in 1608 and died in 
1670. During the English civil war he fought with the Royalists until 
captured by Fairfax and imprisoned. He then served under Cromwell and was 
instrumental in bringing about the restoration of Charles II.  
 
Mond 
Ludwig Mond was a German chemist who partnered John Brunner to invent a 
process for creating soda. He was born in 1838, dying in 1909.  
 
Monet 
Claude Monet was a French impressionist painter. He was born in 1840 and 
died in 1926.  
 
Mongol 
Mongols are any of the various Mongol (or Mongolian) ethnic groups of 
Central Asia. Mongols 
live in Mongolia, Russia, Inner Mongolia (China), Tibet, and Nepal. The 
Mongol language 
belongs to the Altaic family; some groups of Mongol descent speak 
languages in the Sino- 
Tibetan family, however. 
The Mongols are primarily pastoral nomads, herding sheep, horses, cattle, 
and camels. 
Traditionally the Mongols moved with their animals in summer to the 
higher pastures, 
returning in winter to the lower steppes.  
 
Mongoloid 
Mongoloid refers to one of the three major races of humans, 
including the indigenous peoples of Asia, the Indians of the Americas, 
Polynesians, and the 
Eskimos and Aleuts. General physical traits include dark eyes with 
epicanthic folds; straight 
to wavy dark hair; little beard or body hair; fair to tawny skin; low to 
medium-bridged noses; 
thin to medium lips. 
 
Monk 
A Monk is a man who retires from the world to live in a monastery as a 
member of some religious order. Originally all monks were laymen, but 
after the 8th century the seniors and by degrees the other member were 
admitted to holy orders.  
 
Monks 
see "Monk" 
 
Monroe 
James Monroe was the 5th president of the USA. He was born in Virginia in 
1758 and died in 1831.  
 
Montaigne 
Michel de Montaigne was a French essayist. He was born in 1533 at 
Bordeaux and died in 1592.  
 
Montefiore 
Sir Moses Haim Montefiore was a Jewish philanthropist who made a fortune 
on the London stock market. He was born in 1784 and died in 1885. He 
became sheriff of London in 1837. He secured better treatment for Jews in 
various countries, including: Turkey, Russia, Moldavia and Morocco. 
 
Montenegrin 
The Montenegrin are Slavic inhabitants of Montenegro whose culture has 
much in common with the 
Serbs. 
 
Montesquieu 
Charles de Secondat Montesquieu was a French philosopher. He was born in 
1689 and died in 1755. 
 
Montessori 
Maria Montessori was an Italian educationalist. She was born in 1870 and 
died in 1952. She developed the Montessori system of education.  
 
Monteverdi 
Claudio Monteverdi was an Italian composer. He was born in 1567 at 
Cremona and died in 1643. He wrote a lot of church music.  
 
Montfort 
Simon de Montfort was an English statesman and soldier. He was born in 
1208 and died in 1265 at the battle of Evesham.  
 
Montgolfier 
The Montgolfier brothers made a hot air balloon, in which Jean francois 
pilatre de rozier and the marquis d'ariandes made the world's first 
aerial voyage over paris on november the 21st 1783. 
 
Montgomery 
Montgomery was a British soldier. He was born in 1887 at County Donegal 
in Ireland. He entered the army in 1908 and served in the Great War. In 
1939 he was Divisional Commander. He took part in the evacuation of 
Dunkirk and in 1942 took over command of the Eight Army in North Africa. 
In 1944 he led the 21st Army Group in Normandy to the Rhine. 
 
Moore 
Albert Joseph Moore was an English artist. He was born in 1841 and died 
in 1893. 
George Moore was an Irish poet and novelist. He was born in 1852 and died 
in 1933. 
Henry Moore is an English sculptor. He was born in 1898 at Castleford.  
 
Moors 
The Moors were dark skinned people of North Africa who under the 
influence of Islam conquered an empire stretching from the Pamirs to the 
Pyrenees in the 9th century. Their occupation of Spain lasted from 711 
until 1492.  
 
Mordvin 
The Mordvin are a Finnish people inhabiting the middle Volga Valley in 
west Asia. They are known to have lived in 
the region since the 1st century. There are 1 million speakers of Mordvin 
scattered 
throughout west Russia, about one-third of whom live in the Mordvinian 
republic. Mordvin is a 
Finno-Ugric language belonging to the Uralic family.  
 
More 
Sir Thomas More was an English statesman and politician. He was born in 
1478 at London and died in 1535.  
 
Morgan 
Sir Henry Morgan was a Welsh buccaneer. As the leader of the West Indian 
buccaneers he sacked Porto Bello and commited atrocities against the 
inhabitants. He was captured and sent to England in chains, however 
Charles II pardoned him and made him governor of Jamaica. He was born in 
1635 and died in 
1688. 
 
Morland 
George morland was an English painter of rural life. He was born in 1763, 
dying in 1804.  
 
Morley 
Thomas Morley was an English composer of madrigals. He was born in 1557, 
dying in 1603. 
John Morley was the 1st viscount morley. He was an English biographer and 
liberal politician. He was born in 1838, dying in 1923. 
 
Morris 
William morris was an English poet, craftsman and socialist. He was born 
in 1834, dying in 1896. He founded the socialist league and the kelmscott 
press. 
 
Morrison 
Herbert Morrison was a British labour statesman. He was born in 1888, 
dying in 1965. He was home secretary during the second world war. 
 
Morse 
Samuel Morse was an American artist and inventor. He was born in 1791 and 
died in 1872. He invented the morse code and conceived the idea of a 
recording magnetic telegraph.  
 
Moses 
Moses was the founder and legislator of the Israelite nation. He 
delivered his people from Egypt. 
 
Mossi 
The Mossi are the majority ethnic group living in Burkina Faso. Their 
social structure, based on a 
monarchy and aristocracy, was established in the 11th century. The Mossi 
have been 
prominent traders, using cowrie shells as currency. There are about 4 
million speakers of 
Mossi, a language belonging to the Gur branch of the Niger-Congo family.  
 
Mountbatten 
Louis mountbatten was a British admiral and statesman. He was born in 
1900, dying in 1979 when he was assasinated by the ira. He was chief of 
combined operations in 1942 and the last viceroy of India.  
 
Moussorgsky 
Modest Petrovich Moussorgsky was a Russian composer. He was born in 1835 
at St. Petersburg and died in 1881.  
 
Mozart 
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was an Austrian composer. He was born at Salzburg 
in 1756, dying in 1791. He began his career at the age of 4 and toured 
Europe when he was 6. In 1781 he settled in vienna and became friends 
with haydn.  
 
MP 
MP is an abbreviation for member of parliament. An MP is a politician.  
 
Mpongwa 
The Mpongwa are a native tribe of the Gabon.  
 
Muhammad 
Muhammad was the founder of Islam.  
 
Muir 
Edwin Muir was a Scottish poet. He was born in 1887 on Orkney and died in 
1959. 
 
Mumford 
Lewis Mumford is an American writer on town-planning and social problems. 
He was born in 1895.  
 
Munch 
Edvard Munch was a Norwegian painter. He was born in 1863 and died in 
1944. 
 
Munchhausen 
Baron Munchhausen was a German soldier. He was born in 1720 and died in 
1797. He is remembered for telling exagerated tales about his adventures 
during the campaigns he served in. He is the feature of a book, The 
adventures of Baron Munchhausen written by rudolph Raspe in 1785.  
 
Munda 
The Munda are any one of several groups living in north east and central 
India, numbering about 5 
million (1983). Their most widely spoken languages are Santali and 
Mundari, languages of 
the Munda group, an isolated branch of the Austro-Asiatic family. The 
Mundas were formerly 
nomadic hunter-gatherers, but now practise shifting cultivation. They are 
Hindus, but retain 
animist beliefs. 
 
Munro 
Hector Hugo Munro (Saki) was a Britisj novelist. He was born in 1870 and 
died in 1916.  
 
Murillo 
Bartolome Esteban Murillo was a Spanish painter. He was born in 1617 at 
Seville and died in 1682. 
 
Muslim 
A Muslim is someone who professes the religion of Islam.  
 
Musset 
Alfred de Musset was a French romantic poet. He was born in 1810 and died 
in 1857.  
 
Mussolini 
Benito Mussolini was an Italian dictator. He was born in 1883 at 
Predappio and died in 1945 when he was executed by Italian Partisans. He 
founded the fascist movement in 1919 and sided with Hitler during the 
Second World War. 
 
Mutsuhito 
Mutsuhito was Emperor of Japan from 1867 until 1912. He was born in 1852 
and died in 1912. He abolished the feudal system and modernised Japan 
with state schools, conscription and the Western calendar. Under his rule 
Japan became a world naval and military power. In 1889 he introduced a 
constitution. 
 
Muybridge 
Eadweard Muybridge (born Edward James Muggeridge) was a British 
photographer of animal locomotion. His photographs proved for the first 
time that when a horse trots there are times when all its feet are off 
the ground. He was born in 1830 and died in 1904.  
 
Nabokov 
Vladimir Nabokov is a Russian-born American author. He was born in 1899. 
He wrote Lolita. 
 
Naga 
The Naga are the various peoples who inhabit the highland region near the 
Indian/Myanmar (Burma) border; they number approximately 800,000. These 
peoples do not 
possess a common name; some of the main groups are Ao, Konyak, Sangtam, 
Lhota, Sema, 
Rengma, Chang, and Angami. They live by farming, hunting, and fishing. 
Their languages 
belong to the Sino-Tibetan family. 
 
Nahua 
The nahua are an indigenous people of Mexico. 
 
Nahuatl 
The Nahuatl are a group of Mesoamerican Indian peoples, of 
which the best-known group were the Aztecs. The Nahuatl are the largest 
ethnic group in 
Mexico, and their languages, which belong to the Uto-Aztecan (Aztec-
Tanoan) family, are 
spoken by over a million people today. 
 
Nanak 
Nanak was an Indian guru who formed the religion of Sikhism. He was born 
in 1469 and died in 1539.  
 
Nansen 
Fridtjof Nansen was a Norwegian scientist. He was born in 1861 and died 
in 1930. He explored the ploar regions and in 1921 organised relief for 
Russian famine victims. He won the Nobel peace prize in 1922. 
 
Napier 
John Napier was a Scottish mathematician. He was born in 1550 and died in 
1617. He invented logarithms. 
 
Napoleon 
Napoleon Bonaparte was emperor of France. He was born in 1769 and died in 
1821. In 1799 he overthrew the Directory and appointed himself dictator. 
He became emperor in 1804 and reigned until 1815. From 1803 he conquered 
most of Europe. He was finally overthrown following his defeat at 
Waterloo at the hands of Wellington's army and was exiled on the Island 
of St Helena. 
 
Nash 
Paul Nash was an English artist. He was born in 1899 at London and died 
in 1946.  
 
Nasser 
Gamal Abdel Nasser was prime minister of Egypt from 1954 until 1956. He 
was born in 1918 and died in 1970.  
 
Natchez 
The Natchez are an American Indian tribe of the Mississippi area. They 
were almost wiped out by the French in 1731. Today a few survive in 
Oklahoma.  
 
Navaho 
The Navaho are a peaceable agricultural North American Indian people 
related to the Apache; 
population about 200,000. Like the Apache, they speak a Southern 
Athabaskan language. 
 
Navajo 
The Navajo are an American Indian tribe.  
 
Nazi 
The nazis were a German fascist political party led by Hitler.  
 
Neanderthal 
The Naenderthal were early human beings of the Palaeolithic period. The 
first Neanderthal skeleton was found in the Rhineland in 1857. They 
became extinct in 30,000 BC.  
 
Negrito 
The Negrito are several groups living on various islands in south east 
Asia. The Negritos are long- 
established inhabitants of the region. They include the cave-dwelling 
Vedda of Sri Lanka, the 
Andamanese of the Andaman Islands, and the Semang of Malaysia.  
 
Negroid 
Negroid refers to one of the three major races of humans, 
mainly the indigenous peoples of Subsaharan Africa and some of the nearby 
islands in the 
Indian Ocean and the west Pacific. General physical traits include dark 
eyes, tightly curled dark 
hair, brown to very dark skin, little beard or body hair, low to medium-
bridged wide noses, and 
wide or everted lips.  
 
Nehru 
Jawaharial Nehru was an Indian politician. He was born in 1889 and died 
in 1964. He dedicated himself to liberating India from British rule and 
then addressing the problem of poverty in India.  
 
Neil Kinnock 
Neil Gordon Kinnock is a British MP. He was born in 1942 in Wales. He was 
secretary of state for employment between 1974 and 1975.  
 
Nelson 
Horatio Nelson was an English naval commander. He was born in 1758 and 
died in 1805 from a sniper's gunshot at the battle of Trafalgar. Oddly, 
he suffered from sea sickness! 
 
Nero 
Nero (Claudius Caesar) was a Roman Emperor. He was born in 37 and died in 
68. He was a cruel and unpopular Emperor and committed suicide after a 
successful revolt against him. 
 
Newcomen 
Thomas Newcomen was an English engineer. He was born in 1663 at Dartmouth 
and died in 1729. He developed the steam engine.  
 
Newman 
John Henry Newman was a British theologian. He was born in 1801 at London 
and died in 1890. 
 
Newton 
Sir Isaac Newton was an English scientist. He was born at Woolsthorpe in 
1642, dying in 1727. He put forward the theory that the universe is 
regulated by simple mathematical laws. 
 
Ney 
Michel Ney was a French general. He was born in 1769 and died in 1815. He 
served under Napoleon at Jena, Borodino and Waterloo. 
 
Nicholson 
Sir William Nicholson was an English painter. He was born in 1872 at 
Newark and died in 1949. 
 
Nicot 
Jean Nicot was French ambassador at the Portugese court. He was born in 
1530 and died in 1600. He was presented, in Portugal with some tobacco 
plant seeds. He introduced tobacco into France in 1560. The botanical 
name Nicotiana is derived from his name. 
 
Nietzsche 
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche was a German philosopher who originated the 
idea of a superman and the doctrine of perfectability of man through 
forcible self assertion and superiority. 
 
Nightingale 
Florence Nightingale was a Britsih nurse and reformer of hospital 
nursing. She was born in 1820 at Florence and died in 1910. She attended 
the sick durong the Crimean war. 
 
Nobel 
Alfred Bernhard Nobel was a Swedish engineer and the inventor of 
dynamite. He was born in 1833 at Stockholm and died in 1896. On his death 
he left money that annual prizes in physics, chemistry, medicine, 
literature and the cause of peace could be made (the Nobel prizes).  
 
Nollekens 
Joseph Nollekens was an English sculptor. He was born in 1737 and died in 
1823. 
 
Nordic 
Nordic is the ethnic designation for any of the various Germanic peoples, 
especially those of Scandinavia. 
The physical type of Caucasoid described under that term is tall, long-
headed, blue-eyed, fair 
of skin and hair. 
 
Norseman 
The Norsemen were early inhabitants of Norway. The term Norsemen is also 
applied to Scandinavian Vikings who 
during the 8th-11th centuries raided and settled in Britain, Ireland, 
France, Russia, Iceland, 
and Greenland. 
The Norse religion (banned 1000) was recognized by the Icelandic 
government 1973.  
 
Nuba 
The Nuba are a minority ethnic group living in south Sudan, numbering 
about 1 million (1991). They 
speak related dialects of Nubian, which belongs to the Chari-Nile family. 
The Nuba farm terraced fields in the Nuba mountains, to the west of the 
White Nile.  
 
Nuffield 
William Richard Morris Nuffield was a British industrialist and 
philanthropist. He was born in 1877 at Worcester and died in 1963.  
 
Nyanja 
The Nyanja are a central African people living mainly in Malawi, and 
numbering about 400,000. The Nyanja are predominantly farmers, living in 
villages under a hereditary monarchy. 
They speak a Bantu language belonging to the Niger-Congo family.  
 
O'Casey 
Sean O'Casey was an Irish playwright. He was born in 1884 at Dublin and 
died in 1966. 
 
O'Neill 
Eugene Gladstone O'Neill was an American dramatist. He was born in 1888 
at New York and died in 1954. 
 
Oates 
Lawrence Edward oates was an English antarctic explorer. He was born in 
1880. He died by commiting suicide in a blizzard on the return journey 
from the south pole with scott so that the others would not be hampered 
by his frost-bite. 
 
Oceanus 
Oceanus was the son of Uranus and Gaea. 
 
Ocypete 
Ocypete was one of the harpies. 
 
Offa 
Offa was King of Mercia (a region of central England) around 790. He died 
in 796. 
 
Offenbach 
Jacques Offenbach was a German composer. He was born in 1819, dying in 
1880. He wrote the opera tales of hoffmann.  
 
Ohm 
Georg Ohm was a German physicist born in 1787, died 1854, who discovered 
ohm's Law. 
 
Omar Khayyam 
Omar Khayyam was a Persian poet, mathematician and astronomer. He was 
born in 1050 and died in 1123.  
 
Opie 
John Opie was an English painter. He was born in Cornwall in 1761 and 
died in 1807. 
 
Oppenheimer 
J. Robert Oppenheimer was an American physicist and director of the Los 
Almos research project which made the first atomic bomb. He was born in 
1904 and died in 1967.  
 
Orangeman 
An Orangeman is a member of the Ulter Protestant Orange Society which was 
formed in 1795 in opposition to the United Irishmen and the Roman 
Catholic secret societies. It is a revival of the Orange Institution of 
1688 which was formed in support of William III of Orange. The Orangemen 
celebrate William III defeat of the Catholic James II at the Battle of 
the Boyne in 1690.  
 
Orangemen 
see "Orangeman" 
 
Orchardson 
Sir William Orchardson was a British genre and portrait painter. He was 
born at Edinburgh in 1835 and died in 1910. 
 
Orczy 
Baroness Emmusca Orczy was a Hungarian born novelist. She was born in 
1865 and died in 1947. She is remembered for writing The Scarlet 
Pimpernel, which she wrote in 1905.  
 
Orellana 
Francisco de Orellana was a Spanish soldier. He discovered the Amazon 
river, which was so named because he claimed that while travelling down 
the river he was attacked by a tribe of female warriors.  
 
Orford 
Robert Walpole, Earl of Orford was one of Britain's greatest statesmen. 
He was born in 1676 in Norfolk and died in 1745. He was a Whig politician 
who sought to bring the court and the House of Commons into working 
alliance. 
 
Origen 
Origen was a christian theologian and writer of the early christian 
church. He was born in Alexandria in 185 and died in 254. 
 
Oriya 
The Oriya are the majority ethnic group living in the Indian state of 
Orissa. Oriya is Orissa's 
official language; it belongs to the Eastern group of the Indo-Iranian 
branch of the Indo- 
European family. 
 
Ormerod 
Eleanor Anne Ormerod was an English entomologist and the author of 
"Textbook of Agricultural Entomology" published in 1892. She was born in 
1828 and died in 1901.  
 
Orozco 
Jose Clemente Orozco was a Mexican painter. He was born in 1883 and died 
in 1949. 
 
Orpheus 
Orpheus was the son of Apollo and Calliope. He was born at Thrace; 
journeyed with the Argonauts and kept his companions safe by means of his 
lyre given to him by Apollo. 
 
Orsini 
Felice Orsini was an Italian patriot. He was born in 1819 and was 
executed in 1858 in Paris for attempting to assasinate Napoleon III.  
 
Orwell 
George Orwell was an English writer. He was born in 1905 in India and 
died in 1950. He wrote Nineteen Eighty Four and Animal Farm (the book, 
not the video).  
 
Osborne 
John James Osborne is a Britsih playwright and actor. He was born in 
1929. He wrote Look Back In Anger. 
 
Osman Digna 
Osman Digna was originally a slave-dealer at Suakin, he graduated to 
become leader of the Sudan tribesman. He was born in 1836 and died in 
1900.  
 
Ostade 
Haarlem Ostade was a Dutch painter born in 1610, he died in 1685. He was 
a pupil of Franz Hals and was later influenced by Rembrandt. Isaac Ostade 
was a Dutch painter born in 1621 and died in 1649. 
 
Otto I 
Otto I, or Otto The Great as he was known was Emperor of the Holy Roman 
Empire. He was born in 912 and died in 973. He was the son of Henry The 
Fowler. In 936 he was elected king of Germany.  
 
Otto II 
Otto II was the son of Otto I. He was Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. 
He was born in 955 and died in 983. 
 
Otto III 
Otto III was Emperor of The Holy Roman Empire. He was born in 980 and 
died in 1002. He sought to revive the greatness of the Roman Empire, but 
was frustrated by a general revolt in Italy in 1001. 
 
Otto IV 
Otto IV was son of Henry The Lion and Matilda of England. He was born in 
1175 and died in 1218. He was Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. He was 
excommunicated in 1210 for annexing Apulia. 
 
Otway 
Thomas Otway was an English dramatist. He was born in 1652 at Trotton in 
Sussex and died in 1685. He is renowned for his work "Venice Preserved". 
 
Oudinot 
Nicolas Charles Oudinot was born in 1767 and died in 1847. He was Duke of 
Reggio and became Marshal of France in 1809.  
 
Ouless 
Walter William Ouless was an English portrait painter. He was born in 
1848 at St Helier on Jersey.  
 
Ouseley 
Sir Frederick Ouseley was an English composer. He was born in 1825 in 
London and died in 1889. He mainly wrote church music.  
 
Outram 
Sir James Outram was a British soldier. He was born in 1803 and died in 
1863. He carried out a famous ride in disguise through Afghanistan in 
1839 during the Afghan war. He distinguished himself during the Indian 
mutiny.  
 
Ovid 
Publius Ovidius Naso Ovid was a Roman poet. He was born in 43BC and died 
in 17AD. He was born at Sulmo the son of a Roman knight and was educated 
in Rome with a view to a legal career.  
 
Owen 
Robert Owen was an English socialist reformer. He was born in 1771 and 
died in 1858. He wrote "A New View Of Society" published in 1813.  
 
Oxenham 
John Oxenham was an English author of romantic novels and adventure 
stories. His works include "John of Gerisau" and "The Man Who Would Save 
The World".  
 
Oyama 
Prince Iwao Oyama was a Japanese Samurai soldier-statesman. He was born 
in 1842 and died in 1916. He was attache with the German army during the 
Franco-German war. 
 
Pachmann 
Vladimir Pachmann was a Russian pianist and interpreter of Chopin. He was 
born in 1848. 
 
Paderewski 
Ignance Jan Paderewski was a Polish musician. He was born in 1860 at 
Kurilowka and died in 1941.  
 
Paganini 
Nicolo Paganini was an Italian violinist and composer. He was born in 
1784 and died in 1840. He was the founder of the modern school of violin-
playing. 
 
Paget 
Sir James Paget was a British surgeon and lecturer. He was born in 1814 
and died in 1899. He worked at St Bartholomew's hospital, London. 
 
Pain 
Barry Pain was an English journalist and humours author. He was born in 
1867 and died in 1928. He became editor of "To-day" in 1897. Thomas Pain 
was an English author and agitator. He was born in 1737 and died in 1809. 
He published "Common Sense" in 1776 which advocated American 
Independence. 
 
Paine 
Thomas Paine was an English writer on politics and religion. He was born 
in 1737 in Norfolk and died in 1809. 
 
Paish 
Sir George Paish was a British economist. He was born in 1867. He was 
assistant editor of the "Statist" from 1894 to 1900. He wrote "Railways 
in Great Britain" published in 1904.  
 
Palestrina 
Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina was an Italian composer. He was born in 
1524 and died in 1594. His works include Marcellus Mass. 
 
Paley 
William Paley was an English theologian. He was born in 1743 and died in 
1805. In 1782 he became archdeacon of Carlisle. He wrote "Evidences of 
Christianity" in 1794.  
 
Palgrave 
Sir Francis Palgrave was an English historian. He was born in 1788 and 
died in 1861. He wrote "History of England". Francis Turner Palgrave was 
the son of Sir Francis Palgrave. He was an English critic and poet. He 
was professor of poetry at Oxford from 1886 to 1895. He was born in 1824 
and died in 1897. 
 
Palikur 
The Palikur are a South American Indian people living in north Brazil and 
numbering about 1 million. Formerly a warlike people, they occupied a 
vast area between the Amazon and 
Orinoco rivers.  
 
Palissy 
Bernard Palissy was a French potter and glass painter. He discovered how 
to manufacture enamel. He was born in 1510 and died in 1589. 
 
Palmer 
Edward Henry Palmer was a British Orientalist. He was born in 1840 and 
died in 1882. His works include "Oriental Mysticism" published in 1867.  
 
Palmerston 
Henry John Temple Palmerston was an English statesman. He was born in 
1784 in Jampshire and died in 1865. He became Conservative MP for Newport 
in 1807 but in 1828 switched sides to the Liberals. 
 
Papuan 
The Pauan are natives to or inhabitants of Papua New Guinea; a speaker of 
any of various Papuan languages, 
used mainly on the island of New Guinea, although some 500 are used in 
New Britain, the 
Solomon Islands, and the islands of the SW Pacific. The Papuan languages 
belong to the 
Indo-Pacific family.  
 
Paracelsus 
Phillippus Aureolus Paracelsus was a Swiss alchemist and physician. He 
was born in 1493 and died in 1541. He was the first to note occupational 
diseases. 
 
Paris 
Paris was a Trojan prince whose abduction of Helen of Sparta caused the 
Trojan war. 
 
Parmigianino 
Francesco Parmigianino was an Italian painter. He was born in 1503 at 
Parma and died in 1540. 
 
Parnell 
Charles Stewart Parnell was an Irish nationalist politician. He was born 
in 1846 at Avondale and died in 1891.  
 
Pascal 
Blaise Pascal was a French mathematician. 
 
Pasteur 
Louis Pasteur was a French scientist. He was born in 1822 at Dole and 
died in 1895. He founded the modern theory of bacteria. 
 
Pater 
Walter Pater was an English critic. He was born in 1839 and died in 1894. 
 
Pathan 
The Pathan are a people of north west Pakistan and Afghanistan, numbering 
about 14 million (1984). 
The majority are Sunni Muslims. The Pathans speak Pashto, a member of the 
Indo-Iranian  
branch of the Indo-European family.  
The Pathans comprise distinct groups, some living as nomads with herds of 
goats and 
camels, while others are farmers. 
 
Patmore 
Coventry Kersey Dighton Patmore was an English poet. He was born in 1823 
and died in 1896.  
 
Pavlov 
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov was a Russian psychologist. He was born in 1849 at 
Ryazan and died in 1936. He conducted work into conditioned reflexes 
using dogs. 
 
Peel 
Sir Robert Peel was an English statesman. He was born in 1788 at Bury and 
died in 1850. As Home Secretary he reformed the prison service and 
established the Metropolitan Police Force. He was twice Prime Minister, 
in 1834 and from 1841 until 1846.  
 
Penn 
William Penn was an English quaker and the founder of Pennsylvania. He 
was born in 1644, dying in 1718. 
 
Penney 
Sir William George Penney is a British atomic scientist. He was born in 
1909 at Gibraltar.  
 
Pepys 
Samuel Pepys was an English diarist. He was born in 1633 at London and 
died in 1703.  
 
Pericles 
Pericles was an Arthenian ruler and orator. He was born in 490BC and died 
in 429BC. 
 
Perkin 
Sir William Henry Perkin was an English chemist. He was born in 1838 and 
died in 1907. He discovered aniline dyes.  
 
Peron 
Juan Peron is an Argentine army officer. He was president of Argentina 
from 1946 until 1955.  
 
Petain 
Marshal Henri Philippe Petain was a French soldier. He was born in 1856 
at Normandy and died in 1951. He headed the Vichy government which 
collaborated with the Germans after the fall of France during the second 
World War.  
 
Peter 
Peter The Great was a Czar of Russia. He was born in 1672 and died in 
1725. 
 
Petrarch 
Francesco di Petracco (Petrarch) was an Italian poet and scholar. He was 
born in 1304 and died in 1374. 
 
Pharaoh 
Pharaoh was the title of the ruler of Ancient Egypt.  
 
Pharisee 
The Pharisee were a Jewish sect from 1BC to 1AD which were charcterized 
by their strict observance of the traditional and written laws. 
 
Pheidias 
Pheidias was a Greek sculptor. He was born in 500BC and died in 433BC.  
 
Picasso 
Pablo Picasso was a Spanish artist born in 1881, dying in 1973. 
 
Piccard 
Auguste Piccard was a Belgian scientist. He was born in 1884 at Lutry and 
died in 1962. 
 
Piero 
Piero was an Italian painter. He was born in 1420 and died in 1492. He 
painted frescoes in Florence and at Loretto. 
 
Pilcher 
Percy Pilcher, an Englishman, may be said to have invented the hang 
glider. During the late 19th century he invented a man launched glider. 
 
Pinter 
Harold Pinter is a British playwright. He was born in 1930 in London. His 
plays include The Caretaker and The Birthday Party. 
 
Piper 
John Piper is an English painter born at Epsom in 1903. 
 
Pirandello 
Luigi Pirandello was an Italian writer. He was born in 1867 at Girgenti 
and died in 1936. He won the Nobel prize for literature in 1934.  
 
Piranesi 
Giovanni Battista Piranesi was an Italian architect. He was born in 1720 
in Venice and died in 1778.  
 
Pisano 
Niccala Pisano was an Italin sculptor. He was born in 1220 and died in 
1280. He created reliefs such as those on the pulpit in Pisa Cathedral.  
 
Pitt 
William Pitt was a Whig politician. He was born in 1708 and died in 1778. 
 
Planck 
Max planck was a German scientist. He was born at Kiel in 1858, dying in 
1947. He won the nobel prize for physics in 1918.  
 
Plato 
Plato was an ancient Greek philosopher. He was born in 427bc, dying in 
347bc. 
 
Plautus 
Titus Marcius Plautus was a Roman comic poet. He was born in 254BC and 
died in 184BC. 
 
Poe 
Edgar Allan Poe was an American writer. He was born in 1809 at Boston and 
died in 1849. He wrote a number of horror and crime novels. 
 
Poena 
Poena was the attendant of punishment to nemesis. 
 
Pollaiuolo 
Antonio Pollaiuolo was an Italian goldsmith, sculptor and painter. He was 
born in 1429 and died in 1498.  
 
Polo 
Marco Polo was a Venetian traveller. He was born in 1256, dying in 1323. 
He travelled through various eastern countries.  
 
Pope 
The pope is the leader of the Roman catholic church. 
alexander pope was an English poet. He was born in London in 1688, dying 
in 1744. He is remembered for his satire. 
 
Potiguara 
The Potiguara are a group of South American Indians living in north west 
Brazil, and numbering about 1 
million. Their language belongs to the Tupi-Guarani family. Their 
religion is centered 
around a shaman, who mediates between the people and the spirit world.  
 
Poussin 
Nicolas poussin was a French painter. He was born in 1593, dying in 1665. 
 
Powys 
John cowper powys was an English writer. He was born in 1872, dying in 
1964.  
 
Prasad 
Rajendra prasad was the first president of the republic of India between 
1950 and 1962. He was born in 1884, dying in 1963. 
 
Praxiteles 
Praxiteles was a 4th century bc Greek sculptor. He carved hermes carrying 
dionysus. 
 
Priestley 
Joseph priestley was an English chemist. He was born in 1733, dying in 
1804. He worked on gasses and discovered oxygen as did scheele. He moved 
to America in 1794. 
 
Prokofiev 
Sergei Prokofiev was a Russian composer. He was born in 1891 in the 
Ukraine and died in 1953. 
 
Prophet 
A prophet is some one who claims to reveal or interpret god's will. 
 
Proust 
Marcel Proust was a French novelist. He was born in 1871 at Paris and 
died in 1922. 
 
Provost 
A Provost is the chief magistrate in a Royal burgh in Scotland. His 
position is like that of an English Mayor.  
 
Puccini 
Giacomo Puccini was an Italian opera composer. He was born at Lucca in 
1858, dying in 1924. 
 
Pueblo 
The Pueblo were a tribe of American Indians which lived in New Mexico and 
Arizona. They were a farming tribe. 
 
Pueblo Indian 
Pueblo Indian is a generic name for a member of any of the farming groups 
of the south west USA and north Mexico, living 
in communal villages of flat-topped adobe or stone structures arranged in 
terraces. Surviving groups include the Hopi and the Zuni.  
 
Pugin 
Augustus Welby Pugin was an English architect. He was born in 1812 in 
London and died in 1852.  
 
Pulitzer 
Joseph Pulitzer was an American newspaper proprietor and philanthropist. 
He was born in 1847 in Hungary and died in 1911. 
 
Pulteney 
William Pulteney was 1st Earl of Bath. He was born in 1684 and died in 
1764. He led the opposition against Walpole, and became prime minister in 
1741.  
 
Purcell 
Henry Purcell was an English composer born in London in 1659. He died in 
1695.  
 
Puritan 
The Puritans were a group of religious people who wanted what they 
perceived to be extreme purity in church services. They observed a strict 
code of behaviour with few amusements. 
 
Pushkin 
Alexander pushkin was a Russian poet. He was born at Moscow in 1799. He 
died in 1837 from wounds received duelling. 
 
Pym 
John Pym was an English parliamentary leader. He was born in 1584, dying 
in 1643. He opposed Charles I. 
 
Pythagoras 
Pythagoras was a Greek philosopher. He was born on the island of samos in 
582bc, dying in 500bc.  
 
Quadi 
The Quadi were a Teutonic tribe who lived on the Danube between the 
Carpathian Mountains and Theiss. They waged war against the Romans and 
disappeared in the 5th century after moving west with the Suevi. 
 
Quaestor 
In ancient Rome, the quaestors were magistrates responsible for the 
management of public treasure. They received taxes and tribunes, paid the 
troops. At the time of Julius Caesar there were 40 quaestors. 
 
Quasimodo 
Savatore Quasimodo was an Italian poet. He was born in 1901, dying in 
1968. 
 
Quechua 
The Quechua are the largest group of South American Indians. The Quechua 
live in the Andean 
region. Their ancestors included the Inca, who established the Quechua 
language in the 
region. Quechua is the second official language of Peru and is widely 
spoken as a lingua 
franca in Ecuador, Bolivia, Columbia, Argentina, and Chile; it belongs to 
the Andean- 
Equatorial family.  
 
Quiller-Couch 
Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch was a British critic and novelist. He was born 
in 1863 at Fowey and ied in 1944. He wrote Dead Man's Rock. 
 
Quilter 
Roger Quilter was a British composer. He was born in 1877 at Brighton and 
died in 1953. 
 
Quisling 
Vidkun Quisling was a Norwegian traitor and puppet minister. He was born 
in 1887 and died in 1945 when he was executed following the liberation of 
Norway.  
 
Rabbi 
A rabbi is the chief religious leader of a synagogue. 
 
Rabelais 
Francois Rabelais was a French satirist. He was born in 1490 at Chinon 
and died in 1553.  
 
Rachmaninov 
Sergi Rachmaninov was a Russian composer born near lake ilman in 1873. He 
died in 1943. He wrote pieces for the piano.  
 
Racine 
Jean Racine was a French dramatist and poet. He was born in 1639 at La 
Ferte-Milon and died in 1699.  
 
Raeburn 
Sir Henry Raeburn was a Scottish portrait painter. He was born in 1756 
and died in 1823.  
 
Rajput 
The Rajput are a Hindu people, predominantly soldiers and landowners, 
widespread over north India. 
The Rajput states of north west India are now merged in Rajasthan. 
Rajastani languages belong to the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-
European family.  
 
Raleigh 
Sir Walter Raleigh was an English soldier, explorer and author. He was 
born in 1552 near Sidmouth and died in 1618. 
 
Rameau 
Jean-Philippe Rameau was a French composer. He was born in 1683 and died 
in 1764. 
 
Ramsay 
Sir William Ramsay was a Scottish scientist. He was born in 1852 in 
Glasgow and died in 1916. He discovered the inert gases which include 
helium, argon and neon. 
 
Raphael 
Raphael was an Italian painter of the renaissance period. 
 
Rasmussen 
Knud Johan Victor Rasmussen was a Danish arctic explorer. He was born in 
1879 at Jakobshavn and died in 1933. He made a number of journeys into 
the arctic circle to study the lives of the Eskimos.  
 
Rasputin 
Gregory Rasputin was a Russian courtier. He was born in 1871 in Siberia 
and died in 1916 when he was assasinated by members of the Court. 
 
Ravel 
Maurice Ravel was a French composer. He was born in 1875 at Cibourne and 
died in 1937.  
 
Ray 
John Ray was an English naturalist. He was born in 1627, dying in 1705. 
He produced a classification of plants. 
 
Reade 
Charles Reade was a British novelist and dramatist. He was born in 1814 
at Ipsden and died in 1884. He wrote The Cloister and the Hearth. 
 
Regent Albany 
Regent Albany was King of Scotland from 1406 to 1419. 
 
Regent Murdoch 
Regent Murdoch was King of Scotland from 1419 to 1424.  
 
Rembrandt 
Rembrandt was a 17th century Dutch painter. 
 
Remington 
Philo Remington invented the typewriter and also the breach loading 
rifle.  
 
Renoir 
Renoir was a French impressionist painter.  
 
Reuter 
Paul Julius Reuter was a German newsman. He was born in 1816 at Kassel 
and died in 1899. He founded the Reuter's news agency. 
 
Revere 
Paul Revere was an American soldier and patriot. He was born in 1735 at 
Boston and died in 1818. In april 1775 he rode from Boston to Concorde to 
warn the population of the approach of British troops.  
 
Reynolds 
Sir Joshua Reynolds was an English portrait painter. He was born in 1723 
near Plymouth and died in 1792.  
 
Rhodes 
Cecil John Rhodes was a South African statesman. He was born in 1853 at 
Bishop's Stortford and died in 1902.  
 
Richard 
Richard was King of England from 1189 to 1199.  
 
Richard II 
Richard II was son of Edward The Black Prince and King of England from 
1371 to 1399.  
 
Richard III 
Richard III was King of England from 1483 to 1485.  
 
Richard Savage 
Richard Savage was an English poet believed to be the illegitimate son of 
Lord Rivers and the Countess of Macclesfield. He died in 1743.  
 
Richardson 
Samuel Richardson was an English novelist. He was born in 1689 and died 
in 1761. He wrote Pamela. 
 
Richelieu 
Armand Duplessis Richelieu was a French churchman and statesman. He was 
born in 1585 in Paris and died in 1642. In 1624 he became minister of 
state to Louis XIII and dominated the weak King, ruling France himself. 
 
Ridley 
Nicholas Ridley was an English protestant martyr. He was born in 1500, 
dying in 1555 when he was burnt at the stake.  
 
Rienzi 
Cola di Rienzi was an Italian patriot. He was born in rome in 1313. He 
led a popular uprising in 1347, reigned for seven months and then had to 
flee. He was eventually murdered in 1354. 
 
Rilke 
Rainer Maria Rilke was an Austrian poet. He was born in 1875 at Prague 
and died in 1926.  
 
Rimbaud 
Arthur Rimbaud was a Belgian poet. He was born in 1854 in the Ardennes 
and died in 1891.  
 
Rimsky-Korsakov 
Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov was a Russian composer. He was born in 1844 at 
Novogrod and died in 1908. 
 
Rinaldo 
Rinaldo was a famous character in mediaeval romance. He was one of four 
sons of Aymom, cousin to Orlando and a brave knight of the Charlemagne. 
 
Ristori 
Adelaide Ristori was an Italian tragedy actress. She was born in 1822 and 
died in 1906. She wrote "Studies and Memois". 
 
Rivera 
Diego Rivera was a Mexican painter. He was born in 1886 at Guanajuato and 
died in 1957. 
 
Riviere 
Briton Riviere was a British painter of animals. He was born in 1840 amd 
died in 1920.  
 
Rob Roy 
Rob Roy (Robert McGregor) was a Scottish freebooter. He was born in 1671, 
dying in 1734. He helped the poor at the expense of the rich and played a 
lone role in the jacobite uprising of 1715. 
 
Robeck 
Sir John Michael De Robeck was a British admiral. He was born in 1862 and 
died in 1928. He commanded the naval force at Dardanelles.  
 
Robert 
Robert (Bruce) was King of Scotland from 1306 to 1329.  
 
Robert I 
Robert I, Duke of Normandy was the father of William the Conqueror and 
aide to Edward The Confessor. He died in 1035 while returning from a 
pilgrimage to the Holy Land.  
 
Robert II 
Robert II was King of Scotland from 1371 to 1390. 
 
Robert III 
Robert III was King of Scotland from 1390 to 1406.  
 
Roberts 
David Roberts was a Scottish landscape and architectural painter. He was 
born in 1796 and died in 1864. John Roberts was an English billiard 
player. He was born in 1847 and died in 1919. He first won the world 
championship in 1875. He was one of the greatest billiard players of the 
time, setting a record of a break of 597 in 1900 with bonzoline balls. He 
stopped competing after the rules were changed in 1898.  
 
Robertson 
Sir William Robertson was the only British soldier to join as a private 
and make field-marshal. He was born in 1860, dying in 1933. 
 
Robespierre 
Robespierre was a politician of the French revolution.  
 
Robin Hood 
Robin Hood was an English mediaeval hero frequently mentioned in 14th 
century literature. He was depicted as a brave and chivalrous adventurer 
who had his head-quarters in Sherwood Forest.  
 
Robinson 
William Heath Robinson was an English cartoonist renowned for his 
humorous drawings of machines. He was born in 1872, dying in 1944.  
 
Rochester 
John Wilmot Rochester was an English poet and wit. He was bron in 1648, 
dying in 1680. Rockefeller 
John Davison Rockefeller was an American who made a fortune from 
petroleum.  
 
Rockefeller 
John Davison Rockefeller was an American who made a fortune from 
petroleum. 
 
Rod 
Edouard Rod was a Swiss psychological novelist. He was born in 1857 and 
died in 1910. 
 
Rodin 
Auguste Rodin was a French impressionist sculptor. He was born in 1840 
and died in 1917.  
 
Rodney 
George Brydges Rodney was an English admiral who defeated the Spanish 
fleet off cape st. Vincent in 1780. He was born in 1718, dying in 1792. 
 
Roe 
Sir Thomas Roe was a famous English ambassador to the West Indies and 
Brazil. He was born in 1568 and died in 1644. 
 
Roger Hollis 
Roger Hollis was director of MI5, and alleged by Peter Wright (in his 
book "Spy Catcher") to have been a Russian spy. 
 
Rogers 
Samuel Rogers was an English poet. He was born in 1763 and died in 1855. 
He was the son of a banker. He was offered the laureateship when 
Wordsworth died in 1850.  
 
Rogue 
A rogue is an idle vagrant. 
 
Rohillas 
The Rohillas were an Afghan tribe who made themselves masters of 
Rohikhand in the 18th century, but were subdued in 1774 by the Nawab of 
Oudh assisted by a British force.  
 
Roman 
A Roman was an inhabitant of ancient Rome.  
 
Romans 
see "Roman" 
 
Romany 
The Romanys are a nomadic Caucasoid people, also called Gypsy. They are 
believed to have originated in north west 
India, and live throughout the world. The Romany language (spoken in 
different dialects in 
every country where Gypsies live) is a member of the Indo-European 
family. 
 
Rommel 
Erwin Rommel was a German Field Marshal of the 2nd world war. 
 
Romney 
George Romney was an English portrait painter. He was born in 1734 in 
Lancashire and died in 1802.  
 
Romulus 
Romulus was the founder of Rome.  
 
Ronsard 
Pierre de Ronsard was a French poet. He was born in 1524, dying in 1585.  
 
Rontgen 
Konrad Wilhelm Rontgen was a German physicist who discovered x-rays. He 
was born in 1845, dy ng in 1923.  
 
Rooke 
Sir George Rooke was a British admiral. He was born in 1650 and died in 
1709. He commanded the squadron which relieved Londonderry in 1689. 
 
Roon 
Albrecht Theodor Count Von Roon was a Prussian soldier. He was born in 
1803 and died in 1879. He was German minister of war from 1859 until 
1873. 
 
Roosevelt 
Theodore Roosevelt was president of the United States. He was born in 
1858, dying in 1919. 
franklin Delano Roosevelt was president of the United States. He was born 
in 1882, dying in 1945. He was opposed to war, and held the philosophy of 
talk soft, but carry a big stick.  
 
Rosa 
Carl August Nicholas Rosa was an operatic impresario. He was born in 
Hamburg in 1843 and died in 1889.  
 
Rosmini-Serbati 
Antonio Rosmini-Serbati was an Italian philosopher. He was born at 
Rovereto in 1797 and died in 1855. He founded the Rosminians.  
 
Ross 
James Clark Ross was an English admiral and Antarctic explorer. He was 
born in 1800, dying in 1862. 
 
Rossetti 
Dante Gabriel Rossetti was an English painter and poet. He was born at 
London in 1828 and died in 1882. William Michael Rossetti was the brother 
of Dante Gabriele Rossetti. He was an English author. He was born in 1829 
and died in 1919.  
 
Rossini 
Gioacchino Antonio Rossini was an Italian operatic composer. He was born 
in 1792 and died in 1868.  
 
Rostand 
Edmond Rostand was a French poet and dramatist. He was born in 1868 and 
died in 1918. 
 
Rousseau 
Jean Jacques Rousseau was a French philosopher and writer. He was the 
pioneer of the Romantic Movement. He was born in 1712 and died in 1778. 
Henri Rousseau was a French painter. He was born in 1844 and died in 
1910.  
 
Rowlandson 
Thomas Rowlandson was an English caricaturist. He was born in 1756 and 
died in 1827.  
 
Rubens 
Sir Peter Paul Rubens was a flemish painter. He was born in 1577, dying 
in 1640.  
 
Rubinstein 
Anton Grigorovich Rubinstein was a Russian composer and pianist. He was 
born in 1829, dying in 1894.  
 
Ruhmkorff 
Heinrich Daniel Ruhmkorff was a German electrician. He was born in 1803 
and died in 1877. He invented a thermo-electric battery in 1844.  
 
Ruisdael 
Jacob van Ruisdael was a Dutch painter. He was born in 1628 in Haarlem 
and died in 1682.  
 
Rumford 
Benjamin Thompson Rumford was an Anglo-American scientist. He was born in 
1753 in Massachusetts and died in 1814. 
 
Ruskin 
John Ruskin was a British writer and art critic. He was born in 1819 in 
London and died in 1900.  
 
Russel 
Bertrand Arthur William Russel was a British philosopher and 
mathematician. He was born in 1872 in Trelleck and died in 1970. 
 
Russian 
A Russian is an inhabitant of Russia. 
 
Rutherford 
Ernest Rutherford was a British scientist. He was born in 1871 in New 
Zealand and died in 1937. He won the Nobel prize for chemistry in 1908 
for his work with radium.  
 
Saami 
The Saami (Lapp) are a group of herding people living in north 
Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula, and 
numbering about 46,000. Some are nomadic, others lead a more settled way 
of life. 
They live by herding reindeer, hunting, fishing, and producing 
handicrafts. Their language 
belongs to the Finno-Ugric family. Their religion is basically animist, 
but incorporates 
elements of Christianity.  
 
Sabatini 
Rafael Sabatini was an Anglo-Italian writer. He was born in 1875 and died 
in 1950. He wrote Captain Blood, and The Sea Hawk.  
 
Sachs 
Hans sachs was a German poet. He was born at Nuremberg in 1494, dying in 
1576. 
Julius von sachs was a German botanist. He was born in 1832, dying in 
1897. He demonstrated that chlorophyll is formed in chloroplasts only in 
light.  
 
Sadat 
Mohammed Anwar el Sadat was presidant of Egypt. He was born in 1919, 
dying in 1981 when he was assassinated.  
 
Saint-Saens 
Camille Saint-Saens was a French composer. He was born in 1835 in Paris 
and died in 1921. 
 
Saki 
see "Munro" 
 
Saladin 
Saladin was sultan of Egypt and Syria. He was born in 1137, dying in 
1193. He conquered Jerusalem in 1187 and caused the 3rd crusade to take 
place. 
 
Sallust 
Sallust was a Roman historian. He was born in 86BC and died in 35BC.  
 
Samaritan 
The Samaritan are descendants of the colonists forced to settle in 
Samaria (now north Israel) by the 
Assyrians after their occupation of the ancient kingdom of Israel in 722 
BC. 
 
Samurai 
The samurai are a Japanese military caste.  
 
San 
The San (formerly Bushman) are a small group of hunter-gatherer peoples 
living in and around 
the Kalahari Desert. Their language belongs to the Khoisan family. 
 
Sand 
George Sand was a French writer. He was born in 1804 in Paris and died in 
1876. 
 
Sandburg 
Carl Sandburg was an American poet. He was born in 1878 at Galesburg and 
died in 1969.  
 
Santayana 
George Santayana was an American philosopher. He was born in 1863 in 
Madrid and died in 1952. 
 
Sardou 
Victorien Sardou was a French dramatist. He was born in 1831, dying in 
1908.  
 
Sartre 
Jean-Paul Sartre is a French philosopher, playwright and novelist. He was 
born in 1905. 
 
Sassoon 
Siegfried Sassoon was an English writer. He was born in 1886 and died in 
1967. He wrote poetry during the Great War which revealed the horror and 
wasteful destruction of the war.  
 
Saud 
Abdul Azziz Ibn Saud was King of Saudi Arabia. He was born in 1880 in 
Central Arabia and died in 1953.  
 
Savonarola 
Girolamo Savonarola was an Italian religious reformer. He was born in 
1452 at Ferrara and died in 1498 when he was hanged for criticising Pope 
Alexander VI.  
 
Scarlatti 
Domenico Scarlatti was an Italian composer. He was born in 1685 at Naples 
and died in 1757. 
 
Schafer 
Sir Edward Schafer was a British physiologist. He was born in 1850. He 
worked at Edinburgh university and gave a famous address on the origin of 
life at Dundee in 1912. He was knighted in 1913. 
 
Scheele 
Carl wilhelm scheele was a Swedish chemist. He was born in 1742, dying in 
1786. He discovered oxygen as did priestley.  
 
Schiller 
Johann Christoph Friedrich Von Schiller was a German dramatist and poet. 
He was born in 1759 in Wurttemberg and died in 1805. 
 
Schonberg 
Arnold Schonberg was an Austrian composer. He was born in 1874 and died 
in 1951.  
 
Schopenhauer 
Arthur Schopenhauer was a German philosopher. He was born in 1788 at 
Danzig and died in 1860. 
 
Schubert 
Franz Schubert was an Austrian composer. He was born in 1797 in Vienna 
and died in 1828.  
 
Schumann 
Robert Schumann was a German composer. He was born in 1810 at Zwickau and 
died in 1856. 
 
Schweitzer 
Albert Schweitzer was an Austrian doctor, writer, and religious thinker. 
He was born in 1875 and died in 1964.  
 
Scott 
Sir Walter Scott was a Scottish novelist. He was born in 1771 at 
Edinburgh and died in 1832.  
 
Sedgwick 
Adam Sedgwick was an English geologist. He was born in 1785, dying in 
1873. He mapped the rocks of the lake District in 1822. 
 
Seminoles 
The Seminoles are a north American tribe of Indians. They are an offshoot 
of the Choctaw Muskogee tribe. They settled in Florida in 1750. 
 
Semite 
The Semites are the peoples of the Middle East originally speaking a 
Semitic language, and 
traditionally said to be descended from Shem, a son of Noah in the Bible. 
Ancient Semitic 
peoples include the Hebrews, Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, Babylonians, 
Assyrians, 
Chaldaeans, Phoenicians, and Canaanites. The Semitic peoples founded the 
monotheistic 
religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. 
They speak languages of the Hamito-Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic 
family. 
 
Seneca 
Lucius Annaeus Seneca was a Roman philosopher, dramatist and statesman. 
He was born in 4BC at Cordova and died in 65. 
 
Senefelder 
Aloys senefelder was a German inventor. 
 
Serb 
The serbs are Yugoslavia's largest ethnic group, found mainly in Serbia, 
but also in the 
neighboring independent republics of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. 
Their language, 
generally recognized to be the same as Croat and hence known as Serbo-
Croatian, belongs 
to the Slavic branch of the Indo-European family. It has more than 17 
million speakers. 
The Serbs are predominantly Greek Orthodox Christians and write in a 
Cyrillic script. 
 
Serjeant-at-Arms 
The Serjeant-at-Arms is an officer of the House of Commons who has 
responsibility for keeping order. If the speaker orders a member to 
leave, the Serjeant-at-Arms must see that the member leaves. 
 
Shackleton 
Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton was an Antarctic explorer. He was born in 
1874 at Kilkee and died in 1922 of heart-failure whilst on Scott's third 
expedition to the south-pole.  
 
Shakespear 
William shakespear was an English dramatist and poet. He was born in 
stratford upon avon in 1564, dying in 1616.  
 
Shakespeare 
William Shakespeare was an English dramatist and poet. He was born in 
Stratford Upon Avon in 1564, dying in 1616. 
 
Shan 
The Shan are a people of the mountainous borderlands separating Thailand, 
Myanmar (Burma), 
and China. They are related to the Laos and Thais, and their language 
belongs to the Sino- 
Tibetan family. 
 
Shaw 
George Bernard Shaw was an Irish writer. He was born in 1856 in Dublin 
and died in 1950.  
 
Shelley 
Mary Shelley (Mary Godwin) was the daughter of William Godwin. She was 
born in 1797, dying in 1851. She is remembered for writing frankenstein. 
Percy Bysshe Shelley was an English poet. He was born in 1792 at Warnham 
and died in 1822.  
 
Shepherd Kings 
see "Hycsos" 
 
Sheridan 
Richard Brinsley Sheridan was a Britsh dramatist. He was born in 1751 in 
Dublin and died in 1816. 
 
Sherman 
W.t. Sherman was an American soldier of the American civil war. An 
American tank of the second world war was named after him. 
 
Sherpa 
The sherpa are a people of north east Nepal.  
 
Shona 
The Shona are a Bantu-speaking people of south Africa, comprising 
approximately 80% of the 
population of Zimbabwe. They also occupy the land between the Save and 
Pungure rivers in 
Mozambique, and smaller groups are found in South Africa, Botswana, and 
Zambia. The 
Shona are mainly farmers, living in scattered villages. The Shona 
language belongs to the 
Niger-Congo family. 
 
Shostakovich 
Dmitri Shostakovich is a Russian composer. He was born in 1906 at 
Leningrad. He wrote his 7th symphony in Leningrad whilst helping with the 
defence of the city against the Germans during the Second World War.  
 
Sibelius 
Jan Sibelius was a Finnish composer. He was born in 1865 at Tavastehus 
and died in 1958.  
 
Sickert 
Walter Richard Sickert was an English artist. He was born in 1860 and 
died in 1942. 
 
Siddons 
Sarah Siddons was an English actress. She was born in 1755, dying in 
1831. She played with garrick's company at drury lane in 1775. 
 
Sidney 
Sir Philip Sidney was an English poet, soldier and courtier. He was born 
in 1554 and died in 1586.  
 
Sienkiewicz 
Henryk Sienkiewicz was a Polish novelist. He was born in 1846 and died in 
1916. 
 
Sikhs 
The Sikhs are a group of people from Punjab who follow the religion of 
Baba Nanak.  
 
Sinclair 
Sir Clive Sinclair is the English electronics genius who produced the 
first widely available pocket calculator and a series of home computers.  
 
Sindhi 
The Sindhi are the majority ethnic group living in the Pakistani province 
of Sind. The Sindhi 
language is spoken by about 15 million people.  
 
Singer 
Isaac Merritt Singer was an American engineer. He was born in 1811 and 
died in 1875. He developed and patented a single-thread and chain-
stitching sewing machine.  
 
Sinhalese 
The Sinhalese are the majority ethnic group of Sri Lanka (70% of the 
population). Sinhalese is the 
official language of Sri Lanka; it belongs to the Indo-Iranian branch of 
the Indo-European 
family, and is written in a script derived from the Indian Pali form. The 
Sinhalese are 
Buddhists.  
 
Sioux 
The Sioux are a north American Indian tribe.  
 
Sitting Bull 
Sitting Bull was a great leader of the sioux. 
 
Skelton 
John Skelton was an English poet. He was born in 1460 at Diss and died in 
1529. 
 
Slade 
Felix Slade was an English art colllector. He was born in 1790, dying in 
1868.  
 
Slav 
The Slavs are an Indo-European people in central and east Europe, the 
Balkans, and parts of north 
Asia, speaking closely related Slavonic languages. The ancestors of the 
Slavs are believed to 
have included the Sarmatians and Scythians. Moving west from Central 
Asia, they settled in 
east and south east Europe during the 2nd and 3rd millennia BC.  
 
Slessor 
Mary Slessor was a Britsh missionary. She was born in 1848 and died in 
1915.  
 
Sloane 
Sir Hans Sloane was a collector of books and physician. He was born in 
Ireland in 1660. Upon his death in 1753 he left his 50000 volumes of 
books and manuscripts under his will to the nation, thus forming the 
British library. 
 
Slovene 
The Slovene are the Slavic people of Slovenia and parts of the Austrian 
Alpine provinces of Styria 
and Carinthia. There are 1.5-2 million speakers of Slovene, a language 
belonging to the 
South Slavonic branch of the Indo-European family. The Slovenes use the 
Roman alphabet 
and the majority belong to the Roman Catholic Church. 
 
Smith 
Adam Smith was a Scottish economist. He was born in 1723 at Kirkcaldy and 
died in 1790. He wrote the first scientific work on the principles of 
economy, "The Wealth of Nations". 
Sir Matthew Smith was an English painter. He was born in 1879 at Halifax 
and died in 1959.  
 
Smollett 
Tobias Smollett was a British novelist. He was born in 1721 at Dalquhurne 
and died in 1771. 
 
Smuts 
Jan Christiaan Smuts was a South African statesman. H was born in 1870 
and died in 1950. He was South African Prime Minister from 1919 until 
1924.  
 
Smyth 
Ethel Mary Smyth was an English composer and suffragette. She was born in 
1858, dying in 1944. She wrote the opera the wreckers.  
 
Soane 
Sir John Soane was an English architect and collector. He was born in 
1753 near Reading and died in 1837. 
 
Socrates 
Socrates was a Greek philosopher. He was born in 469BC and died in 399BC. 
 
Soddy 
Frederick Soddy was an English scientist. He was born in 1877 at 
Eastbourne and died in 1956. He was a pioneer in the study of radioactive 
substances.  
 
Solomon 
Solomon was the third King of the Hebrews. He lived around 960BC. 
 
Sophocles 
Sophocles was a Greek dramatist. He was born in 496BC at Colonus and died 
in 406BC. 
 
Sotho 
The Sotho are a large ethnic group in southern Africa, numbering about 7 
million and 
living mainly in Botswana, Lesotho, and South Africa. The Sotho are 
predominantly farmers, 
living in small village groups. They speak a variety of closely related 
languages belonging to 
the Bantu branch of the Niger-Congo family. With English, Sotho is the 
official language of 
Lesotho. 
 
Sousa 
John Philip Sousa was an American composer. He was born in 1854 at 
Washington and died in 1932. he is famous for his military marches.  
 
Southey 
Robert Southey was an English poet and writer. He was born in 1774 and 
died in 1843.  
 
Sovereign 
A Sovereign is a supreme ruler, especially it is a term applied to a 
monarch  
 
Spartacus 
Spartacus was a Roman gladiator and slave. He escaped and led a slave 
insurrection routing several Roman armies before he was killed by 
crassus.  
 
Spencer 
Herbert Spencer was a British philosopher. He was born in 1820 at derby 
and died in 1903. 
Stanley Spencer was an English painter. He was born in 1891 and died in 
1959. 
 
Spengler 
Oswald Spengler was a German philosopher. he was born in 1880 at 
Blankenburg and died in 1936.  
 
Spenser 
Edmund Spenser was an English poet. He was born in 1552 in London and 
died in 1599. 
 
St Anselm 
St Anselm was an archbishop of Canterbury. He was born in 1033 and died 
in 1109.  
 
Stein 
Chris Stein was lead guitarist with the 70's punk rock band Blondie.  
 
Steinbeck 
John Ernest Steinbeck was an American novelist. He was born in 1902 and 
died in 1968. 
 
Stendhal 
Stendhal was a French novelist. He was born in 1783 and died in 1842. 
 
Stephen 
Stephen was King of England from 1135 to 1154.  
 
Stephenson 
George Stephenson was an English engineer. He was born at Wylam in 1781, 
dying in 1848. He is remembered for designing locomotives. In 1829 his 
locomotive called the rocket ran at 30mph and won a prize.  
 
Sterne 
Laurence Sterne was a British novelist. He was born in 1713 and died in 
1768. 
 
Stevenson 
Robert Stevenson was a Scottish engineer. He was born in 1772, dying in 
1850. He invented the flashing light for use in lighthouses. 
Robert Louis Stevenson was a Scottish author. He was born at edinburgh in 
1850, dying in 1894. He wrote treasure island, kidnapped, Dr jekyll and 
Mr hyde, and the Master of Ballantrae. 
 
Stheino 
Stheino was one of the gorgons. 
 
Stoker 
Bram Stoker was an Irish author. He was born in 1847, dying in 1912. He 
wrote the novel Dracula.  
 
Stokes 
Sir George Gabriel Stokes was an Irish mathematician  and physicist to 
whom is due the modern theory of viscuous fluids and the discovery that 
rays beyond the violet end of the spectrum produce flourescence in 
certain substances. He was born in 1819 and died in 1903. 
 
Stopes 
Marie Carmichael Stopes was the English pioneer of birth control. She was 
born in 1880, dying in 1958. Her book married love was published in 1918. 
 
Storch 
see "Stor" 
 
Storck 
Nicholas Storck (Storch?) was a fanatical German preacher. He formed the 
anabaptists in 1521 and excited rebellion of the German lower orders 
which was quelled with force in 1525. 
 
Stowe 
Harriet Beecher Stowe was an American author. She was born in 1811, dying 
in 1896. Her book uncle tom's cabin was published in 1852 in which she 
exposed slavery. 
 
Stradivari 
Antonio Stradivari was an Italian maker of violins. He was born at 
Cremona in 1644, dying in 1737. His violins are the finest ever made.  
 
Strauss 
Johann Strauss was a 19th century Austrian composer. 
Richard Strauss was a German composer. he was born in 1864 and died in 
1949. 
 
Stravinsky 
Igor Stravinsky was a Russian composer. He was born in 1882, dying in 
1971. He wrote several ballets. 
 
Strindberg 
August Strindberg was a Swedish writer. He was born in 1849 and died in 
1912. 
 
Suffragette 
Suffragettes were the members of the women's suffrage movement who 
campaigned for women to be allowed to vote. The movement was abolished in 
1918 when women aged 30 were allowed to vote.  
 
Sullivan 
Sir Arthur Seymour Sullivan was an English composer. He was born in 1842 
and died in 1900.  
 
Sun Yat-Sen 
Sun Yat-Sen was a Chinese statesman. He was born in 1866 and died in 
1925.  
 
Suppe 
Franz von Suppe was an Austrian composer. He was born in 1819 in Dalmatia 
and died in 1895. 
 
Sutherland 
Graham Sutherland is an English painter.  
 
Swazi 
The swazi are the majority group of people in Swaziland. The Swazi are 
primarily engaged in 
cultivating and raising livestock, but many work in industries in South 
Africa. The Swazi 
language belongs to the Bantu branch of the Niger-Congo family. 
 
Swedenborg 
Emanuel Swedenborg was a Swedish religious thinker. He was in 1688 and 
died in 1772.  
 
Swift 
Jonathan Swift was an Irish writer. He was born in 1667 in Dublin and 
died in 1745. He wrote Gulliver's Travels which was an attack on the 
English society of the time. 
 
Swinburne 
Algernon Charles Swinburne was an English poet. He was born in 1837 and 
died in 1909. 
 
Synge 
John Millington Synge was an Irish dramatist. He was born in 1871 at 
Rathfarnham and died in 1909.  
 
Tacitus 
Conelius Tacitus was a Roman historian. He was born in 55 and died in 
120.  
 
Tagalog 
The Tagalog are the majority ethnic group living around Manila on the 
island of Luzon, in the 
Philippines, who number about 10 million. The Tagalog live by fishing and 
trading. In 
its standardized form, known as Pilipino, Tagalog is the official 
language of the Philippines, 
and belongs to the Western branch of the Austronesian family. The Tagalog 
religion is a 
mixture of animism, Christianity, and Islam. 
 
Tagore 
Sir Rabindranath Tagore was an Indian poet. He was born in 1861 and died 
in 1941. 
 
Tai 
The Tai are the groups of south east Asian peoples who speak Tai 
languages, all of which 
belong to the Sino-Tibetan language family. There are over 60 million 
speakers, the majority 
of whom live in Thailand. Tai peoples are also found in SW China, north 
west Myanmar (Burma), 
Laos, and north Vietnam.  
 
Talapoin 
A talapoin is a Buddhist priest or monk.  
 
Tamerlane 
Tamerlane (Timur) was King of Samarkland. He was born in 1336 and died in 
1405. He extended the Mongol empire through Persia, Georgia, Armenia and 
Russia.  
 
Tamil 
The Tamils are the majority ethnic group living in the Indian state of 
Tamil Nadu. 
Tamils retain a distinct culture. They possess an ancient literary 
tradition and have developed 
their own court arts. The majority of Tamils are farmers, cultivating 
rice in irrigated fields. They 
are also known for their handicrafts, including pottery.  
 
Tamils 
The Tamils are an indigenous people of southern India and Sri Lanka.  
 
Tancred 
Tancred was a hero of the first Crusade. He was born in 1078 of Marquis 
Odo the Good and Emma. He died in 1112 of a wound received at Antioch.  
 
Tasaday 
The Tasaday are an indigenous people of the rainforests of Mindanao in 
the Philippines. 
 
Tasman 
Abel Tasman was a Dutch explorer. He discovered tasmania in 1642. 
 
Tasso 
Torquato Tasso was an Italian poet. He was born in 1544 at Sorrento and 
died in 1595. 
 
Tatian 
Tatian was a heresiarch of the 2nd century. He was born in Ethiopia 
around 120 and died around 172. He became a disciple of Justin, after 
whose martyrdom he left Rome and travelled the Middle East preaching. He 
taught abstinence from wine, meat and marriage and disbelieved the 
divinity of Christ. 
 
Tauri 
The Tauri were the earliest known inhabitants of the Crimea.  
 
Tchaikovsky 
Pyotr Tchaikovsky was a 19th century Russian composer.  
 
Tell 
William Tell was a Swiss hero. He lived during the 14th century.  
 
Tennyson 
Alfred Tennyson was an English poet. He was born in 1809 and died in 
1892.  
 
Thackeray 
William Makepeace Thackeray was an English novelist. He was born at 
calcutta in 1811, dying in 1863. He wrote vanity fair.  
 
Thales 
Thales was a Greek philosopher. He was born in 636BC and died in 546 BC.  
 
Thane 
In English history, a thane was someone who was awarded land by the King 
or another superior as a reward for military service. Thanes ranked 
between ordinary freemen and hereditary nobles.  
 
Theophrastus 
Theophrastus of Lesbos was a Greek naturalist. He was born in 368BC and 
died in 284BC. He wrote A History of Plants.  
 
Thibaud 
Jacques Thibaud was a French violinist. He was born in 1880, dying in an 
air crash in 1953. 
 
Thomas 
Dylan Thomas was a Welsh poet. he was born in 1914 in Swansea and died in 
1953. He wrote Under Milk Wood. 
 
Thomson 
J. J. Thomson was an English scientist. He was born in 1856 at Cheetham 
and died in 1940. He won the Nobel prize for physics in 1906. 
 
Thoreau 
Henry David Thoreau was an American naturalist and writer. He was born in 
1817 at Concord and died in 1862. He wrote Walden.  
 
Thucydides 
Thucydides was an Athenian historian. He was born in 460BC and died in 
399BC. He wrote a history of the Peloponnesian War.  
 
Thug 
The thugs were a Hindu sect who strangled their victims as sacrifices to 
Kali.  
 
Thuringian 
The Thuringian were an ancient tribe of central Germany. They were 
conquered by the Franks in the 6th century.  
 
Tiepolo 
Giovanni Battista Tiepolo was a Venetian painter. He was born in 1696 and 
died in 1770. He is famous for the frescoes he painted. 
 
Tigro 
The Tigro are a people of north Ethiopia. The Tigro language is spoken by 
about 2.5 million people; it belongs 
to the south east Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic family. Tigrinya is 
a closely related language 
spoken slightly to the south.  
 
Tintoretto 
Jacopo Robusti (Tintoretto) was an Italian painter. He was born in 1518 
in venice and died in 1594. 
 
Titian 
Tiziano Vecellio (Titian) was an Italian painter. He was born in 1477 and 
died in 1576. 
 
Tito 
Josip Tito was a Yugoslav revolutionary and military leader. He was born 
in 1892 in Croatia. He liberated Yugoslavia from the invading German 
armies during the Second World War. 
 
Tlingit 
The Tlingit are a North American Indian people of the north west coast, 
living in south Alaska and north British 
Columbia. They used to carve wooden poles representing their family 
crests, showing such 
animals as the raven, whale, octopus, beaver, bear, wolf, and the 
mythical "thunderbird". 
Their language is related to the Athabaskan languages.  
 
Tolstoy 
Leo Nikolaievich Tolstoy was a Russian novelist. He was born in 1828 at 
Tula and died in 1910. He wrote "War and Peace".  
 
Torquemada 
Thomas de Torquemada was a Dominican monk and founder of the Spanish 
Inquisition. He was born in 1420 and died in 1498. 
 
Torricelli 
Evangelista Torricelli was an Italin physicist. He was born in 1608 and 
died in 1647. He discovered atmospheric pressure. 
 
Toscanini 
Arturo Toscanini was an Italian musician. He was born in 1867 and died in 
1957. 
 
Toulouse-Lautrec 
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec was a French painter. He was born in 1864 at 
Albi and died in 1901. 
 
Treves 
Sir Frederick Treves was an English surgeon. He was born in 1853 and died 
in 1923. He was one of the founders of the Red Cross society. He operated 
on Edward VII for appendicitis in 1902. 
 
Trevithick 
Richard Trevithick was an English inventor. He was born in 1771 in 
Cornwall and died in 1833. He invented the high-pressure steam engine. 
 
Triton 
Triton was a herald of Neptune. 
 
Troglodyte 
Troglodyte is a  Greek term for a cave dweller, designating certain 
peoples in the ancient world. The 
troglodytes of south Egypt and Ethiopia were a pastoral people. 
 
Trollope 
Anthony Trollope was an English novelist. He was born in 1815 and died in 
1852. He started life as a post-office clerk in 1834. His works include 
Barchester Towers, published in 1857. 
 
Trotsky 
Lev Davidovich Trotsky was a Russian Soviet leader. He was born in 1877. 
He was assasinated in South America under orders from Stalin.  
 
Troubridge 
Sir Thomas Troubridge was a British read-admiral. He was born in 1758 and 
died in 1807. He distinguished himself at the capture of Sartine. 
 
Truman 
Harry S. Truman was an American politician and President. He was born in 
1884 in Missouri. In 1934 he was elected to the senate for the Democrats. 
In 1945 he became President when Roosevelt died. In 1948 he was re-
elected President and in 1952 he retired from politics. 
 
Tryon 
Sir George Tryon was a British admiral. He was born in 1832 and died in 
1893. He commanded the Mediterranean fleet in 1891. His mistaken orders 
led to the sinking of the Victoria with himself and 358 officers and men 
on board off Tripoli.  
 
Tswana 
The Tswana are the majority ethnic group living in Botswana. The Tswana 
are divided into four subgroups: the 
Bakwena, the Bamangwato, the Bangwaketse, and the Batawana. Traditionally 
they are rural- 
dwelling farmers, though many now leave their homes to work as migrant 
laborers in South 
African industries. The Tswana language belongs to the Bantu branch of 
the Niger-Congo 
family.  
 
Tuareg 
The Tuareg are a nomadic Berber people of the west and central Sahara.  
 
Tukano 
The Tukano are an indigenous South American Indian people of the Vaupos 
region on the 
Colombian-Brazilian border, numbering approximately 2,000. An estimated 
12,000 speak 
languages related to Tukano. The other main Tukanoan groups are Bara, 
Barasana, Cubeo, 
Desana, and Makuna. 
 
Turgenev 
Ivan Sergeievitch Turgenev was a Russian novelist. He was born in 1818 at 
Orel and died in 1883. He wrote "A Sportsman's Sketches" in 1852 which 
dealt with country life and the plight of Russian serfs. 
 
Turner 
Joseph Mallord William Turner was an English painter. He was born in 1775 
in London and died in 1851. 
 
Turpin 
Richard (Dick) Turpin was a notorious English highwayman. he was born in 
1706 and died in 1739 when he was hanged.  
 
Tuscarora 
The Tuscarora are a North American indian tribe. They originated from 
North Carolina and are now a member of the Iroquois confederacy.  
 
Tussaud 
Marie Tussaud was born in 1760 in Switzerland. She died in 1850. She 
founded the famous Tussaud's wax works in London.  
 
Tutsi 
The Tutsi are the minority ethnic group living in Rwanda and Burundi. 
They are traditionally farmers. 
 
Twa 
The Twa are an ethnic group comprising 1% of the populations of Burundi 
and Rwanda. The 
Twa are the aboriginal inhabitants of the region. They are a pygmoid 
people, and live as 
nomadic hunter-gatherers in the forests. 
 
Twain 
Mark Twain was an American writer. He was born in 1835 at Hannibal and 
died in 1910. He wrote "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer". 
 
Tyler 
Wat Tyler was the leader of the English peasant's revolt of 1381. 
 
Uhland 
Johann Ludwig Uhland was a German poet and ballad writer, born 1787, died 
1862. 
 
Uigur 
The Uigur are a Turkic people living in north west China and Kazakhstan; 
they form about 80% of the population of the Chinese province of Xinjiang 
Uygur. There are about 5 million speakers of 
Uigur, a language belonging to the Turkic branch of the Altaic family; it 
is the official language of the province. 
 
Umpire 
An umpire is someone to whose sole decision a matter in dispute between 
two parties is refered. 
 
Undset 
Sigrid Undset was a Norwegian writer. She was born in 1882 and died in 
1949. She won the Nobel prize for literature in 1928.  
 
Utrillo 
Maurice Utrillo was a French painter. He was born in 1883 in Paris and 
died in 1955. He was taught how to paint by his mother, Suzanne Valadon. 
 
Vanbrugh 
Sir John Vanbrugh was an English dramatist and architect. He was born in 
1664 in London and died in 1726. His first comedy, "The Relapse", opened 
in 1696. He designed Blenheim Palace and Castle Howard. 
 
Vandals 
The Vandals were a war-like Germanic tribe who between the 5th and 6th 
centuries invaded Gaul, Spain and North Africa. In 455 they sacked Rome. 
They were renowned for wantonly destroying art treasures and books. 
 
Vasco da Gama 
Vasco Da Gama was a Portugese explorer. He discovered the sea-route from 
Europe to India. 
 
Vauban 
Sebastien de Prestre de Vauban was a French military engineer. He was 
born in 1633, dying in 1707. He invented the socket bayonet and assisted 
Louis XIV in the expansion wars. 
 
Vaughan Williams 
Ralph Vaughan Williams was an English composer. He was born in 1872 at 
Down Ampney and died in 1958.  
 
Vedda 
The Vedda are the aboriginal peoples of Sri Lanka, who occupied the 
island before the arrival of the Aryans about 550 BC. Formerly cave-
dwelling hunter-gatherers, they have now almost 
died out or merged with the rest of the population. They speak a 
Sinhalese language, belonging to the Indo-European family. 
They live mainly in the central highlands, and many practise shifting 
cultivation.  
 
Vega Carpio 
Lope Felix de Vega Carpio was a Spanish dramatist and poet. He was born 
in 1562 and died in 1635. He served in the Spanish Armada against 
England.  
 
Velazquez 
Diego Rodriguez de Silva y Velazquez was Spain's most celebrated painter. 
He was born in 1599 at Seville and died in 1660.  
 
Verdi 
Giuseppe Verdi was an Italian composer. He was born in 1813 and died in 
1901. 
 
Verlaine 
Paul Verlaine was a French poet. He was born in 1844 and died in 1896. He 
formed the Symbolists school of poetry. 
 
Vermeer 
Jan Vermeer was a Dutch painter. He was born in 1632 at Delft and died in 
1675. 
 
Verne 
Jules Verne was a French writer. He was born in 1828 at Nantes and died 
in 1905. He wrote "Around the World in Eighty Days", and "Twenty Thousand 
Leagues Under The Sea". 
 
Veronese 
Paolo Veronese (Paolo Cagliari) was an Italian painter. He was born in 
1528 at Verona and died in 1588. 
 
Verrocchio 
Andrea del Verrocchio was an Italian sculptor, painter, silversmith and 
engineer. He was born in 1435 in Florence and died in 1488. He was a 
teacher of Leonardo da Vinci.  
 
Vesalius 
Andreas Vesalius was a Belgian physician and founder of the science of 
anatomy. He was born in 1514 and died in 1564. He wrote "On the Fabric of 
The Human Body". 
 
Vespucci 
Amerigo Vespucci was an Italian explorer. He was born in 1454 and died in 
1512. He discovered the Amazon River in 1499. The continent of America 
was named after him. 
 
Vicar 
A vicar is a church of England priest.  
 
Viceroy 
A viceroy is someone who acts as governor of a country or province by 
authority of the ruler. 
 
Victoria 
Queen victoria was queen of England from 1837 to 1901. She was born in 
1819 and died in 1901. She had the longest reign of any English monarch. 
 
Villa 
Francisco Villa was a Mexican revolutionary leader. He was born in 1877 
and died in 1923 when he was assassinated.  
 
Villa-Lobos 
Heitor Villa-Lobos was a Brazilian composer. He was born in 1887 and died 
in 1959.  
 
Villon 
Francois Villon was a French poet. He was born in 1431 in Paris and died 
in 1463. 
 
Virgil 
Publius Vergilius Maro (Vergil) was a Roman poet. He was born in 70BC 
near Mantua and died in 19BC. 
 
Visigoths 
see "Goths" 
 
Vivaldi 
Antonio Vivaldi was an Italian composer. He was born in 1680 and died in 
1743.  
 
Volta 
Alessandro Volta was an Italian scientist. He was born in 1745 and died 
in 1827. He invented the voltaic cell. The electrical unit the volt is 
named after him. 
 
Voltaire 
Voltaire was a French writer. He was born in 1694 in Paris and died in 
1778.  
 
Wagner 
Richard Wagner was a 19th century German composer. He was born in 1813 at 
Leipzig and died in 1883. 
 
Wallace 
Edgar Wallace was a British novelist. He was born in 1875 and died in 
1932. 
 
Walloon 
The Wallonn are a French-speaking people of south east Belgium and 
adjacent areas of France. The name Walloon is etymologically linked to 
Welsh.  
 
Walpole 
Horace Walpole was a British Politician. He was born in 1717 and died in 
1797. 
Robert Walpole was an English statesman. He was born in 1676 at Houghton 
and died in 1745. 
 
Walton 
Izaak Walton was an English writer. He was born in 1593 at Stafford and 
died in 1683. He wrote "The Compleat Angler", the first English nature 
book. 
Sir William Walton was an English composer. He was born in 1902 at 
Oldham. 
 
Washington 
George Washington was an American statesman and the first President of 
the USA. He was born in 1732 at Briges Creek and died in 1799. 
 
Watt 
James Watt was a Scottish inventor. He was born in 1736 at Greenock and 
died in 1819. 
 
Watteau 
Antoine Watteau was a French painter and engraver. He was born in 1684 at 
Valenciennes and died in 1721.  
 
Watts 
George Frederic Watts was an English painter and sculptor. He was born in 
1817 in London and died in 1904.  
 
Waugh 
Evelyn Arthur St. John Waugh was a British author. He was born in 1903 
and died in 1965.  
 
Wavell 
Archibald Percival Wavell was a British soldier. He was born in 1883 at 
Colchester and died in 1950. From 1943 until 1947 he was Viceroy of 
India.  
 
Webb 
Sidney James Webb was an English social reformer. He was born in 1859 and 
died in 1947. 
 
Weber 
Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von Weber was a German composer. He was born 
in 1786 near Lubeck and died in 1826. 
 
Webster 
John Webster was an English dramatist. He was born in 1580 and died in 
1625. he wrote "The White Devil" and "The Duchess of Malfi". 
 
Wedgwood 
Josiah Wedgwood was an English potter. He was born in 1730 at Burslem and 
died in 1795. He founded the Wedgwood potteries.  
 
Wells 
Herbert George Wells was an English writer. He was born in 1866 at 
Bromley and died in 1946. Although he wanted to be a teacher, bad health 
meant he couldn't so he turned to writing. He wrote "The Invisible Man", 
"The Time Machine" and "The War Of The Worlds".  
 
Wesley 
John Wesley was an English preacher and the founder of the Methodist 
church. He was born in 1703 at Epworth and died in 1791. 
 
Weyden 
Roger van der Weyden was a Flemish painter. He was born in 1399 at 
Tournai and died in 1464.  
 
Wheatstone 
Sir Charles Wheatstone was an English scientist. He was born in 1802 near 
Gloucester and died in 1875. He invented the Wheatstone bridge which 
measures electrical resistance.  
 
Whistler 
James Abbott McNeill Whistler was an American artist. He was born in 1834 
at Lowell and died in 1903. 
 
Whitefield 
George Whitefield was an English preacher. he was born in 1714 at 
Gloucester and died in 1770. He led a group called the Calvanistic 
Methodists.  
 
Whitman 
Walt Whitman was an American poet. He was born in 1819 at Long Island and 
died in 1892. 
 
Whittington 
Richard Whittington was Lord Mayor of London. He was born in 1358 at 
Pauntley and died in 1423. He mad a fortune as a mercer, and upon his 
death left all his money to London charities.  
 
Whittle 
Sir Frank Whittle was an English inventor. he was born in 1907 at 
Leamington. He invented the jet propulsion engine for aircraft, first 
used in the Gloster E 2839 aircraft in 1941.  
 
Whitworth 
Sir Joseph Whitworth was an English mechanical engineer and inventor. He 
was born in 1803 at Stockport and died in 1887. In 1835 he invented the 
knitting machine. In 1869 he invented a process of fluid compression for 
making steel for use in guns. 
 
Wilberforce 
William Wilberforce was an English statesman. He was born in 1759 at Hull 
and died in 1833. His life was dedicated to the abolition of slavery. 
 
Wilde 
Oscar Fingall O'Flahertie Wills Wilde was a British writer who was 
persecuted for his homosexuality. He was born in 1854 at Dublin and died 
in 1900. He wrote "The Importance Of Being Earnest".  
 
William 
William was King of Scotland from 1165 to 1214. 
 
Williams 
Tenessee Williams (Thomas Lanier) is an American playwright. He was born 
in 1914. He wrote "A Street Car Named Desire" and "Cat on a Hot Tin 
Roof". 
 
William Godwin 
see "Godwin" 
 
William II 
William II was a son of William The Conqueror and King of England from 
1087 to 1100. 
Kaiser William II was the 3rd German Emperor. He was born in 1859 and 
died in 1941. He ascended to the throne in 1888. 
 
William III 
William III was King of England from 1689 to 1702.  
 
William IV 
William IV was King of England from 1830 to 1837. 
 
Wilson 
James Harold Wilson was a British labour statesman and Prime Minister. He 
was born in 1916. He entered parliament in 1945. He became Prime minister 
in 1964.  
 
Wodehouse 
Pelham Grenville Wodehouse was an English humorous novelist. He was born 
in 1881. He invented the characters "Jeeves and Wooster".  
 
Wolf-Ferrari 
Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari was a German-Italian composer. He was born in 1876 
in Venice and died in 1948. 
 
Wolfe 
James Wolfe was an English soldier. He was born in 1727 at Westerham and 
died in 1759 at the battle of Abraham which his forces none-the-less won 
and thus secured Canada for the British from the French.  
 
Wolof 
The Wolof are the majority ethnic group living in Senegal. There is also 
a Wolof minority in Gambia. There are about 2 million speakers of Wolof, 
a language belonging to the Niger- 
Congo family. The Wolof are predominantly arable farmers, and some also 
raise cattle.  
 
Wood 
Sir Henry Joseph Wood was an English conductor. He was born in 1869 in 
London and died in 1944. 
 
Woolf 
Virginia Woolf was an English novelist. She was born in 1882 and died in 
1941.  
 
Woolworth 
Frank Winfield Woolworth was an American trader who started the "five and 
ten cent stores" which grew into the world famous "F.W. Woolworth" chain 
of stores. 
 
Wordsworth 
William Wordsworth was an English poet. He was born in 1770 at 
Cockermouth and died in 1850.  
 
Wren 
Sir Christopher Wren was an English architect. He was born in 1632 at 
East Knoyle and died in 1723. He designed St. Paul's Cathedral in London 
after the Great Fire Of London in 1666.  
 
Wright 
Frank Lloyd Wright was an American architect. he was born in 1869 and 
died in 1959. 
Orville Wright was an American pioneer of flying. He was born in 1871 and 
died in 1948. Together with his brother he made the first controlled 
flight of an aeroplane. 
Wilbur Wright was the brother of Orville Wright. He was born in 1867 and 
died in 1912. 
 
Xenophanes 
Xenophanes was a Greek poet and philosopher. He lived around 500BC. 
 
Xerxes 
Xerxes was King of Persia. He was born in 519bc, dying in 465bc. He 
invaded Greece and defeated the spartans at thermopylae but he in turn 
was defeated at salamis. 
 
Xhosa 
The Xhosa are a Bantu people of southern Africa, living mainly in the 
Black National State of Transkei. Traditionally, the Xhosa were farmers 
and pastoralists, with a social structure based on a monarchy.  
 
Yao 
The Yao are a people living in south China, north Vietnam, north Laos, 
Thailand, and Myanmar (Burma), and numbering about 4 million. The Yao 
language may belong to either the Sino-Tibetan or the Thai language 
family. The Yao incorporate elements of ancestor worship in their animist 
religion. 
The Yao are generally hill-dwelling farmers practising shifting 
cultivation, growing rice, vegetables, and also opium poppies. Some are 
nomadic. 
 
Yardie 
see "Yardy" 
 
Yardy 
Yardy is a Jamaican slang expression for someone (Jamaican or foreign) 
who knows their way around the island, and especially the ghettoe. The 
expression is often misused in England to describe an imaginary gang of 
organised Jamaican criminals (the yardies). Infact, no such Jamaican 
mafia exists.  
 
Yeats 
William Butler Yeats was an Irish poet and dramatist. He was born in 1865 
in Dublin and died in 1939. 
 
Yi 
The Yi are a people living in south China; there are also Yi populations 
in Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam, totaling about 5.5 million. The Yi are 
farmers, producing both crops and 
livestock. Their language belongs to the Sino-Tibetan family; their 
religion is animist.  
 
Yoruba 
The Yoruba are the majority ethnic group living in south west Nigeria; 
there is a Yoruba minority in east Benin. They number approximately 20 
million in all, and their language belongs to the Kwa 
branch of the Niger-Congo family. The Yoruba established powerful city-
states in the 15th century, known for their advanced culture which 
includes sculpture, art, and music. 
 
Zapotec 
The Zapotec are a North American Indian people of south Mexico, now 
numbering approximately 250,000, living mainly in Oaxaca. The Zapotec 
language, which belongs to the Oto-Mangean family, has nine dialects  
 
Zorn 
Anders Leonhard Zorn was a Swedish artist. He was born in 1860, dying in 
1920.  
  
  
WEAPONS OF WAR  
  
 
10/22DSP 
The 10/22DSP is a Ruger .22" calibre rimfire carbine. It takes a 10-round 
rotary magazine.  
 
12/250 Rapid 
The 12/250 Rapid is a precharged air rifle made by Theoben. It has a 23 
inch barrel in .25" calibre and takes a 12-round magazine. Power is 
adjustable from 33ft/lbs to 40ft/lbs. 
 
Action 
In weapon terms, action refers to the working mechanism of a firearm. 
Various types exist, including single-shots, multi-barrels, revolvers, 
slide- or pump-action, lever-action, bolt-action, semi-automatic and 
automatic.  
 
Acton 
An acton was a quilted or padded tunic worn under a coat of mail as a 
defence against bruising in combat. They were popular in the 15th 
century.  
 
Agent Orange 
Agent Orange was a selective weedkiller, notorious for its use in the 
1960s during the 
Vietnam War by American forces to eliminate ground cover which could 
protect enemy forces. It was subsequently discovered to contain highly 
poisonous dioxin. 
Agent Orange, named for the distinctive orange stripe on its packaging, 
combines equal parts of 2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) and 2,4,5-
T (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid), both now banned in the USA.  
 
AGM-114 
The AGM-114 (hellfire) is an American laser-guided anti-tank missile. It 
can be carried by helicopters or ground forces. It has a flight speed of 
mach 1.7 and a range of 5 miles.  
 
AGM-114A 
The AGM-114A is an anti-tank missile carried by American helicopters. It 
has a flight speed of 170 m/s and a maximum range of 7000 meters. It is 
unusual in being a laser guided missile. Also called the hellfire 
missile. 
 
AGM-65 
The AGM-65 is an air-to-ground missile used by the US army. It has a 
flight speed of 180 m/s and a maximum range of 16000 meters. 
 
AH-64 
The AH-64 is an American two-seat attack helicopter.  
 
Airgun 
An airgun is not a firearm but a gun that uses compressed air or carbon 
dioxide to propel a projectile. 
 
Ajax 
The Ajax was a British light cruiser of the Second World War. She was 
armed with 8 6 inch guns, 8 4 inch anti-aircraft guns, 8 2 pounder anti-
aircraft guns, 12 .5 inch guns and 8 21 inch torpedo tubes. She had a top 
speed of 32.5 knots. She carried a crew of 550. 
 
AK47 
The AK47 is a Soviet assault rifle. It is an automatic weapon with a 
cyclic rate of 600 rpm and a muzzle velocity of 717 m/s. It is sighted to 
800m. The AK47 takes a 7.62mm round from a 30-round box. 
 
Al-Hussayn 
The Al-Hussayn is an Iraqi army modified Scud missile capable of 
projecting a smaller payload of about 500 kg a distance of up to 650 km. 
 
Altmark 
The Altmark was a German POW ship of the Second World War. The prisoners-
of-war were rescued by the British destroyer Cossack.  
 
Ammunition 
Ammunition generally refers to the assembled components of complete 
cartridges or rounds i.e., a case or shell holding a primer, a charge of 
propellant (gunpowder) and a projectile (bullets in the case of handguns 
and rifles, multiple pellets or single slugs in shotguns). Sometimes 
called "fixed ammunition" to differentiate from components inserted 
separately in muzzleloaders. 
 
APC 
APC is an abbreviation for armoured personnel carrier.  
 
APCS 
see "APC" 
 
Aquila 
Aquila is an American RPV.  
 
Arbalist 
see "Cross-bow" 
 
Armor 
Armor is body protection worn in battle. The invention of gunpowder led, 
by degrees, to the virtual abandonment of armor until World War I, when 
the helmet reappeared as a defense against shrapnel. 
Modern armor, used by the army, police, security guards, and people at 
risk from assassination, uses nylon and fiberglass and is often worn 
beneath clothing. 
 
Armored Personnel Carrier 
An Armored Personnel Carrier (APC) is a wheeled or tracked military 
vehicle designed to transport up to ten people. Armoured to withstand 
small-arms fire and shell splinters, it is used on battlefields.  
 
Armstrong Gun 
The Armstrong Gun is a type of cannon named after its inventor, William 
Armstrong. It is made of wrought-iron spirally-coiled bars. It has a 
rifled barrel. The projectile is covered in soft lead. As the projectile 
is propelled out of the cannon, the lead coating is compressed into the 
rifle grroves, causing it to spin. The Armstrong Gun was invented in the 
middle of the 19th century.  
 
Arquebus 
The arquebus was a hand-gun similar to a musket. It fired a two ounce 
ball, and was fired from a forked rest. A larger variant which took a 
heavier ball was used in fortresses.  
 
Arrow 
An arrow is a missile projected by a bow. 
 
Arsine 
Arsine, short for Arseniuretted hydrogen, is a blood irritant gas used 
during the Second World War. It has very little smell and causes violent 
vomiting and blood poisoning. 
 
Artillery 
Artillery refers to missile type weapons. 
 
AS-14 
The AS-14 is a Soviet air-to-ground anti-tank missile. It has a flight 
speed of 150-175 m/s and a maximum range of 20000 meters. It is carried 
by SU-25 and other aircraft. 
 
ASDIC 
ASDIC was an abbreviation used during the Second World War for Allied 
Submarine Detection Investigation Committee. It was a device used for 
detecting underwater ships. The American name was sonar.  
 
Assegai 
The assegai is a spear used as a weapon by the Kaffres of South Africa. 
It is made of hard wood with an iron tip and is used for throwing and 
thrusting.  
 
AT-4 
The AT-4 is an American lightweight multi-purpose weapon. It is a single 
shot anti-tank rocket with iron sights guidance and a range of about 
300m. 
 
ATGM 
ATGM is an abbreviation for anti-tank guided missile. 
 
ATGMS 
see "atgm" 
 
Atomic Bomb 
The Atomic bomb is a bomb deriving its explosive force from nuclear 
fission as a result of a neutron chain reaction. It was developed in the 
1940s in the USA into a usable weapon. 
Research began in Britian in 1940 and was transferred to the USA after 
its 
entry into World War II the following year. 
Known as the Manhattan Project, the work was carried out under the 
direction 
of the American physicist Robert Oppenheimer at Los Alamos, New Mexico. 
 
Automatic (firearm) 
An automatic is a firearm designed to feed cartridges, fire them, eject 
their empty cases and repeat this cycle as long as the trigger is 
depressed and cartridges remain in the feed system. Examples: machine 
guns, submachine guns, selective-fire rifles, including true assault 
rifles.  
 
AV-8b 
The AV-8b is a harrier ground attack aircraft.  
 
AWACS 
AWACS is an acronym for Airborne Warning And Control System. It is a 
surveillance system that incorporates a long-range surveillance and 
detection radar mounted on a 
Boeing E-3 sentry aircraft.It was used with great success in the 1991 
Gulf War. 
 
B-1 
The B-1 is an American strategic bomber and cruise missile carrying 
aircraft. 
 
B-25 
The Mitchell B-25 was an American medium bomber used during the Second 
World War. It carried a crew of 5, a maximum speed of 308mph and a 
service ceiling of 25400ft. It had a range of 2650 miles. 
 
Baker Rifle 
The Baker rifle was the first rifle accepted for English military use. It 
was a muzzle loader with a calibre of 0.625". It was produced from 1800 
to 1838.  
 
Ball (firearm) 
In weapon terminology, a ball was originally a spherical projectile, now 
generally a fully jacketed bullet of cylindrical profile with round or 
pointed nose. Most commonly used in military terminology. 
 
BAR 
The Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR) was a .30 inch calibre gas operated 
automatic rifle designed by Browning and manufactured by Winchester, Colt 
and other companies from 1918 onwards. It had an effective range of 550m.  
 
Bayonet 
A bayonet is a short sword attached to the muzzle of a firearm. The 
bayonet was placed inside the barrel of the muzzleloading muskets of the 
late 17th century. The sock or ring bayonet, invented 1700, allowed a 
weapon to be fired without interruption, leading to the demise of the 
pike. 
Since the 1700s, bayonets have evolved into a variety of types. During 
World War I, the French used a long needle bayonet,the British a sword 
bayonet, while the Germans adopted a "pioneer" bayonet with the rear edge 
formed into a saw. As armies have become more mechanized, bayonets have 
tended to decrease in length. 
Although many military leaders have advocated the use of the bayonet, in 
practice it has been rarely used. 
 
Bazooka 
The bazooka was an American infantry anti-tank missile used during the 
Second World War. It had a range of 90m. 
 
BBC 
BBC is an abbreviation for Bromo-benzyl-cyanide, a tear gas used during 
the second world war. It had a smell faintly of watercress. It caused 
pain in the eyes, a copious flow of tears, spasms of the eyelids and 
irritation of shaved skin. 
 
Beretta 
Beretta are an Italian gun manufacturer.  
 
Beretta m38a 
The Beretta m38a is an Italian sub-machine gun developed during the 
second world war. It takes a 9mm round from a 10/20/40-round box. Its 
cyclic rate is 600rpm and it has a muzzle velocity of 420 m/s.  
 
Bergmann mp18 
The Bergmann mp18 was a German sub-machine gun developed during the 
course of the great war. It takes a 9mm round from a 32-round snaildrum. 
It has a cyclic rate of 400rpm and a muzzle velocity of 365 m/s. 
 
Bergmann mp28 
The Bergmann mp28 was a German sub-machine gun developed from the 
bergmann  mp18. It takes a 9mm round from a 20/30/50-round box. Its 
cyclic rate is 500rpm and it has a muzzle velocity of 365 m/s. Unlike the 
mp18, it can fire single shots or bursts. 
 
BF 110C 
The Messerschmitt BF 110C was a German fighter aircraft of the Second 
World War. It carried a crew of 2. It was armed with 4 7.9mm MG 17 
machine guns and 2 20mm MG FF cannons in the nose and 1 7.9mm MG 15 
machine gun in the rear cockpit. It had a top speed of 349 mph and a 
range of 565 miles. 
 
Blackpowder 
Blackpowder was the earliest type of firearms propellant that has 
generally been replaced by smokeless powder except for use in 
muzzleloaders and older breechloading guns that demand its lower pressure 
levels. 
 
Blank Cartridge 
A blank cartridge is a round loaded with blackpowder or a special 
smokeless powder but lacking a projectile. Used mainly in starting races, 
theatrical productions, troop exercises and in training dogs. 
 
Blowpipe 
A blowpipe is a tubular weapon through which a missile is blown.  
 
Blunderbuss 
The blunderbuss was usually a short carbine or pistol intended as a 
defensive weapon which fired a large load of heavy shot at close ranges.  
 
Bolas 
Bolas is a form of missile used by South American Indians. It is a length 
of rope with a stone or ball of metal at each end. When used it is swung 
round the head by one hand and then hurled at an animal so as to entangle 
it by twisting round its legs. 
 
Bolt-action 
Bolt-action is a gun mechanism activated by manual operation of the 
breechblock that resembles a common door bolt.  
 
Bomb 
A bomb is a hollow shell filled with an explosive. The bomb was invented 
in the 15th century for use with a mortar. Early bombs were a hollow iron 
ball filled with explosive and fitted with a fuse which was ignited as 
the bomb left the mortar. 
 
Bombard 
A bombard was a type of cannon or mortar generally loaded with stone 
instead of iron balls. 
 
Boomerang 
A boomerang is a curved wooden weapon of Australian aborigines. 
 
Bow 
A bow is a weapon for propelling arrows. It is made of a strip of 
flexible wood and a cord. 
 
Boys Anti-Tank Rifle 
The Boys Anti-Tank Rifle was designed by Captain Boys at Enfield in 1935 
as an anti-armour weapon. It was a .55 inch calibre short bipod mounted 
rifle with a bolt action and fed from a 5 round box magazine.  
 
Breech 
The breech is the portion of the barrel with chamber into which a 
cartridge or projectile is loaded.  
 
Broadsword 
A broadsword is a sword with a broad blade designed chiefly for cutting. 
They were used by some British cavalry and Highland infantry. The 
claymore was a broadsword. 
 
Brown bess 
Brown bess is a family of English flint-lock muskets introduced into the 
British army towards the end of the 17th century and used at the battle 
of waterloo. 
 
Browning High Power Pistol 
The Browning High Power Pistol is a 9mm automatic pistol manufactured by 
FN of Belgium to the Browning design of 1926. It is a recoil-operated 
semi-automatic pistol which takes a 13-round magazine. 
 
Brunswick Rifle 
The Brunswick Rifle was a .704 inch calibre muzzle loading, percussion 
cap rifle issued to the British army from 1838 until 1851. It was 
manufactured by Enfield, and was sighted to 270 m. 
 
BT-7-2 
The BT-7-2 was a Soviet tank used during the Second World War. It was 
armed with 1 45mm gun and 2 7.62mm machine guns. It had a top speed of 
45mph on road wheels, and 30mph tracked. It had a range of 220 miles 
tracked and carried a crew of 3.  
 
Buckler 
A buckler was a small shield worn on the left arm 
 
Bullet 
A bullet is the projectile expelled from a gun. It is not synonymous with 
cartridge. Bullets can be of many materials, shapes, weights and 
constructions such as solid lead, lead with a jacket of harder metal, 
round-nosed, flat-nosed, hollow-pointed, etc.  
 
Caliber 
Caliber is the nominal diameter of a projectile of a rifled firearm or 
the diameter between lands in a rifled barrel. In the USA it is usually 
expressed in hundreds of an inch; in Great Britain in thousandths; in 
Europe and elsewhere in millimeters. 
 
CAP 
CAP is an abbreviation for Chlor-aceto-phenone, a tear gas used during 
the second world war. It had a smell faintly of floor polish. It caused 
pain in the eyes, a copious flow of tears, spasms of the eyelids and 
irritation of shaved skin.  
 
Carbine 
A carbine is a rifle with a relatively short barrel.  
 
Carronade 
A carronade is a short, large calibre ship's gun. 
 
Case-shot 
Case-shot was an early form of shrapnel shell. Small iron balls were put 
into a cylindrical box (called a canister) that justs fits the bore of 
the gun. The shell was then fired like any other projectile.  
 
Casemate 
A casemate is a valuted chamber within a fortress wall with embrasures 
for defence, and more recently it describes the armoured enclosure in 
which warship guns are mounted with embrasures through which they fire.  
 
Cateran 
A cateran was a Highland irregular soldier or raider. 
 
Cei-Rigotti 
The Cei-Rigotti automatic rifle is an Italian gas operated rifle 
developed in the 1890s. It takes a 6.5Mm round from a 25-round box. It 
has a muzzle velocity of 730 m/s and is sighted to 1400m. The cyclic rate 
is 900 rpm. 
 
Center-fire 
Center-fire refers to a cartridge with its primer located in the center 
of the base of the case.  
 
Cestus 
The cestus was a leather thong bound around the hand. It was covered with 
knots, and often loaded with lead and iron. The Roman origin of the 
modern-day knuckle duster.  
 
CFV 
CFV is an abbreviation for cavalry fighting vehicle.  
 
Ch-53e 
The Ch-53e is an American amphibious assault transport helicopter.  
 
Chaffee tank 
see "m24" 
 
Chain-shot 
Chain-shot was two cannon balls joined by a chain which when fired from a 
cannon revolved upon the shorter axis and were hence effective for mowing 
down masts and rigging. 
 
Chamber (firearm) 
The chamber is the rear part of the barrel that is formed to accept the 
cartridge to be fired. A revolver employs a multi-chambered rotating 
cylinder separated from the stationary barrel. 
 
Chaparral 
see "m48" 
 
Chassepot 
The Chassepot was a French, bolt action, needle fire rifle manufactured 
by Imperiale during the 1860s. It was adopted as standard by the French 
army in 1866 and remained the standard until 1874. It had an effective 
range of 400m. 
 
Chassepot Rifle 
The Chassepot Rifle was a breech loading rifle adopted by the French 
infantry in 1866, but given up by the turn of the century. 
 
Claymore 
The claymore was originaly a large two-handed double-edged sword of the 
Scottish Highlanders; now a basket hilted, double-edged broad-sword.  
 
Colt 
Samuel Colt of Hartford, Conneticut patented the first successful 
percussion revolver in england in 1835 and in America in 1836.  
 
Colt commando 
The Colt commando is a US automatic rifle. It takes a .223" round from a 
20/30-round magazine. It has a muzzle velocity of 915 m/s and a cyclic 
rate of 750 rpm. It is sighted to 458m. 
 
Copperhead 
see "m712" 
 
Cordite 
Cordite is a smokeless explosive used in cartridges. It is made from 58% 
nitro-glycerine, 37% gun-cotton and 5% vaseline. 
 
Corvette 
A corvette is a convoy escort and patrol warship. 
 
Courageous 
The Courageous was a British aircraft carrier. It was the first Allied 
warship to be sunk by enemy action in the Second World War. She was sunk 
on 17th September 1939 by U-29. 
 
Cross-bar shot 
Cross-bar shot was cannon balls with iron bars crossing through them. The 
bars would extend some 6 to 8 inches out of the cannon ball at both 
sides. Cross-bar shot was used for destroying rigging and palisading. 
 
Cross-bow 
The cross-bow (arbalist) is a bow fastened across a stock (hence the name 
cross bow). The bow string was cocked and fired by way of a trigger, 
projecting a bolt. The cross-bow was invented by the Normans but went out 
of fashion when the long-bow became popular, mainly because 12 arrows per 
minute could be fired from a long-bow compared to 3 bolts per minute from 
a cross-bow. 
 
Cruise missile 
The Cruise Missile is a long-range guided missile that has a terrain-
seeking radar system and flies at moderate speed and 
low altitude. It is descended from the German V1 of the Second World War. 
Initial trials in the 1950s demonstrated the 
limitations of cruise missiles, which included high fuel consumption and 
relatively slow speeds as well as inaccuracy and a small warhead. 
The Tomahawk cruise missile is an American missile capable of having a 
nuclear warhead. It has a range of 583km and a flight speed of mach 0.7. 
 
Cruiser 
A cruiser is a warship. 
 
Crusader 
The crusader was a British tank used in the second world war. It carreid 
a crew of five, and had a top speed of 28mph. It was initialt armed with 
a two pounder gun, these were upgraded to the six pounder gun later in 
the war. 
 
Curtal-ax 
The curtal-ax was a type of short sword.  
 
Curtana 
The curtana is a pointless sword carried before English monarchs at their 
coronation. Emblematically it is considered as the sword of mercy.  
 
Cutlass 
The cutlass was a short sword carried by seamen. It was effective due to 
being short enough to be easy to control, and yet long enough to defend a 
skilful swordsman. Today the term is used in Jamaica for the machette 
which resemble in simple form the cutlass they evolved from. 
 
Cylinder (weapon) 
The cylinder is the drum of a revolver that contains the chambers for the 
ammunition. 
 
DA 
DA is an abbreviation for Di-phenyl-chlor-arsine, a nore irritant gas 
used during the Second World War. It has no smell. It has a delayed 
action, but causes sneezing, a burning pain in the chest, nose, throat 
and mouth after a few minutes. 
 
Dahlgren Gun 
The Dahlgren Gun was an improved form of cannon invented in the 19th 
century by John Dahlgren of the US navy. It was unusual in having less 
metal between the muzzle and the trunnions than other guns. 
 
Damascus-steel 
Damascus-steel was a kind of steel originally made in Damascus and much 
prized for making swords. It was a laminate of pure Iron and steel 
comprising higher than normal quantities of carbon and produced by 
careful forging, doubling and twisting. 
 
Deringer 
The Deringer was a pocket pistol invented by Henry Deringer of 
Philadelphia. The original models were single barelled percussion muzzle 
loaders with a rifled barrel. In 1861 Daniel Moore patented a 0.41" 
calibre rim-fire cartridge model. 
 
Destroyer 
The Destroyer is a small, fast warship designed for antisubmarine work. 
Originally called "torpedo-boat destroyers", they were designed by 
Britain to counter the large flotillas built by the French and Russian 
navies in the late 19th century. 
They proved so effective that torpedo-boats were more or less abandoned 
in the early 1900s, but the rise of the submarine found a new task for 
the "destroyer". They proved invaluable as antisubmarine vessels in both 
the Great War and Second World War.  
 
Deutschland 
The Deutschland was a German pocket-battleship of the Second World War. 
She set out on her first North Atlantic cruise on 24th August 1940. 
 
DH4 
The DH4 was the first British daylight bomber aircraft. It first flew in 
December 1916 and saw action during the Great War. 
 
Double-action 
Double-action is a handgun mechanism where pulling the trigger retracts 
and releases the hammer or firing pin to initiate discharge.  
 
Dragon 
see "m47" 
 
Dragoon 
A Dragoon was a mounted soldier who carried an infantry weapon such as a 
"dragon", or short musket, as used by the French army in the 16th 
century. The name was retained by some later regiments after the original 
meaning became obsolete. 
The Dragoon was a revolver manufactured by Colt in 1855. It was a single-
action pin fire revolver with a 6-round cylinder. It had a calibre of .44 
inches. It was also known as the Old Model Army Revolver.  
 
DUKW 
The DUKW was an American amphibious truck used during the Second World 
War. It was basically a standard 6 x 6 GMC 2.5 ton cargo truck fitted 
with buoyancy tanks and with screw propulsion when in the water. DUKW 
were mainly used to ferry supplies and men from ship to shore, and played 
a vital part in almost every amphibious landing performed by Allied 
troops.  
 
Dum-dum bullet 
The dum-dum bullet was a British military bullet developed in India's 
Dum-Dum Arsenal and used on India's North West Frontier and in the Sudan 
in 1897 and 1898. It was a jacketed .303 cal. British bullet with the 
jacket nose left open to expose the lead core in the hope of increasing 
effectiveness. 
 
Earthwork 
An earthwork is a military fortification formed chiefly of earth. They 
were cheaper and easier to repair than stone defences and also carried 
less risk of injury to the defenders from broken stone. 
 
EM2 
The EM2 is a British automatic rifle with a cyclic rate of 450 rpm. It 
takes a .280" round from a 20-round box. The muzzle velocity is 772 m/s 
and it is sighted to 549m. 
 
Exeter 
The Exeter was a British heavy cruiser of the Second World War. She was 
armed with 6 8inch guns, 4 4inch anti-aircraft guns and 2 2pounder anti-
aircraft guns and 6 21inch torpedo tubes. She had a top speed of 32.5 
knots and a range of 10000 miles. 
 
Exocet 
The exocet is a French anti-ship missile. It has a range of 70km and a 
flight speed of mach 0.8. Exocet missiles can be launched by aircraft or 
ships. The missile is guided, and flies less than 3m above the sea level. 
 
F-15 
The f-15 is an American single-seat air superiority fighter aircraft. 
 
F1 
The f1 is an accurate Australian sub-machine gun. It takes a 9mm round 
from a 34-round box. It has a cyclic rate of 600rpm and a muzzle velocity 
of 365 m/s.  
 
Fal 
The fn fal is a Belgian rifle. It has a muzzel velocity of 853 m/s, is 
gas operated, and is sighted to 600m. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 20-
round box. It was first manufactured in 1950. It is capable of automatic 
or single shot fire.  
 
Farquhar-hill 
The farquhar-hill rifle is a British rifle taking a .303" round from a 
20-round drum. Operation is automatic with a cyclic rate of 700rpm. It 
has a muzzle velocity of 732 m/s and is sighted to 1372m. 
 
Female 
Female was the name of one of the first British tanks. They were fitted 
with six machine guns for use in anti-infantry roles. 
 
Ferguson Rifle 
The Ferguson Rifle was a .5 inch calibre breech-loading rifle 
manufactured by Durs Egg in the 1770s. It was 155 cm long and had an 
effective range of 250 m.  
 
FG42 
The FG42 is a German assault rifle developed in 1942. It is gas operated 
and takes a 7.92mm round from a 20-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 
762 m/s and it is sighted to 1200m. It can be fired single shot or in 
bursts.  
 
FGM-77a 
The FGM-77a is a US infantry anti-tank missile developed in the 1970s. It 
has a flight speed of 175 m/s and a maximum range of 1500 meters. 
 
FH70 
The FH70 is a NATO mobile field howitzer. It fires, under computer 
control, three 43 kg shells at a range of 32 km in 15 seconds. 
 
FIM-43a 
The FIM-43a (redeye) is an American shoulder-fired infantry surface-to-
air missile. It entered service in 1964. It flies at a speed of mach 2.5 
to a range of 2 miles using initial optical aiming and infrared homing 
guidance.  
 
FIM-92a 
The FIM-92a (stinger) is an American portable air-defense missile. It was 
first used by British sas troops in the falklands conflict. The missile 
flies at a speed of mach 2 to a range of 5km. It uses passive infrared 
homing guidance. 
 
Firearm 
A firearm is a weapon from which projectiles are discharged by the 
combustion of an explosive. Firearms are generally divided into two main 
sections: artillery (ordnance or cannon), with a bore greater than 2.54 
cm, and small arms, with a bore of less than 2.54 cm. 
Although gunpowder was known in Europe 60 years previously, the invention 
of firearms dates from 1300 to 1325, and is attributed to Berthold 
Schwartz, a German monk. 
 
Flint-lock 
The flint-lock was a development of the discharge method for the musket. 
Sparks were generated by one impact of a piece of flint on the steel 
above the priming powder. 
 
Flying Fortress 
The Flying Fortress (Boeing Fortress II) was an American heavy bomber 
aircraft used during the Second World War. It carried a crew of 9. It had 
a top speed of 305 mph and a service ceiling of 40000 ft. 
 
Forlorn Hope 
A Forlorn Hope was a body of men, usually volunteers, of different 
regiments selected to lead an assault, enter a breach or perform another 
perilous task. The name comes from the Dutch word hoop meaning a company. 
 
Fox 
see "m93" 
 
Fraise 
A fraise is a fortification consisting of pointed stakes driven into the 
ramparts in a horizontal or inclined position. 
 
Franc-tireur 
The Franc-tireur were a body of irregular soldiers organized in France 
during the Franco-German War of 1870-1871. They were sharp-shooters 
employed in guerrilla warfare, harassing the enemy and cutting off 
detachments.  
 
Frigate 
A frigate is a light-weight, fast and nimble warship. 
 
Ft-17 
The ft-17 was a French tank produced by renault and first developed in 
1917. 3500 ft-17 tanks were made, and it remained in service until 1940. 
 
Fusil 
A fusil was a light flint-lock musket closely resembling a carbine. 
 
Fusilier 
A Fusilier was a soldier armed with a fusil.  
 
Gabion 
A gabion was an early form of sandbag, it was a wickerwork basket of 
cylindrical form but without a bottom and about 50cm in diamiter and 84cm 
tall (20 inches diamiter, 33 inches tall). In a siege, when forming a 
trench a row of gabions was placed on the outside nearest the fortress 
and filled with earth as it was thrown from the trench, so as to form a 
protective barrier against fire from the besieged defenders. Gabions were 
still in use as recently as 1900. 
 
Galleon 
A Galleon was a Spanish or Portugese warship. They had three or four 
decks. 
 
Galley 
A galley was a low, flat-buil warship with one deck and navigated by 
sails and oars once common in the Mediterranean. Common galleys were 
between 30 and 60 meters long, and smaller galleys were known as half-
galleys and quarter-galleys.  
 
Garand 
The garand is a US gas operated rifle adopted by the army from 1936. It 
takes a .30" round from an 8-round internal box. It has a muzzle velocity 
of 853 m/s and is sighted to 1097m. 
 
Gecko 
see "SA-N-4" 
 
Gewehr 
Gewehr was a range of German military rifles used during the first and 
Second World Wars. 
 
Gewehr M1898 
The Gewehr M1898 was a bolt action rifle manufactured by Spandau from 
1898 onwards. It took a 5 round box magazine and had an effective range 
of 900m. These rifles were still in use by the German army during the 
Second World War. 
 
Gewehr41 
The gewehr41 is a German rifle manufactured by walther and developed in 
1941. It is gas operated and has a muzzle velocity of 776 m/s. It takes a 
7.92mm round from a 10-round box. It is sighted to 1200m. 
 
Gewehr98 
The gewehr98 is a German rifle developed in 1898. It takes a 7.92mm round 
from a 5-round box. Operation is bolt. The muzzle velocity is 870 m/s and 
it is sighted to 2000m. 
 
Gingal 
The gingal was a 19th century large musket used in Asia. It was fired 
from a rest and on occassions was mounted on a light carriage.  
 
Glock 
Glock is an American firearms manufacturer. 
 
Glock m20 
The glock m20 is a semi-automatic pistol manufactured by glock. It takes 
a 15-round 10mm calibre magazine.  
 
Gloster Gladiator 
The Gloster Gladiator was a British made biplane used by the Swedish and 
Finnish air forces during the Second World War. It had a top speed of 
253mph. It was armed with 2 .303 inch Browning machine guns in the 
fuselage. It had a range of 428 miles.  
 
Goblet 
see "SA-N-3" 
 
Gp-141 
The gp-141 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of .357" 
magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged. 
 
Gp-160 
The gp-160 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 6" barrel and a calibre of .357" 
magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged. 
 
Gp-161 
The gp-161 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 6" barrel and a calibre of .357" 
magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged. 
 
Gpf-331 
The gpf-331 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.   
 
Gpf-340 
The gpf-340 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.   
 
Gpf-341 
The gpf-341 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.   
 
Graf Spee 
The Graf Spee was a German warship of the Second World War. She was armed 
with 6 11 inch guns and 8 5.9 inch guns, 8 37mm anti-aircraft guns, 10 
20mm Anti-Aircraft guns and 8 21 inch torpedo tubes. She had a top speed 
of 26 knots and a range of 19000 miles. She carried a crew of 1150. 
 
Grail 
see "SA-N-5" 
 
Grenade 
A grenade is a small missile, containing an explosive or other charge, 
usually thrown (hand grenade) but sometimes fired from a rifle. 
Hand grenades are generally fitted with a time fuse of about four 
seconds: a sufficient amount of time for the grenade to reach the target 
but not enough for the enemy to pick it up and throw it back. 
Rifle grenades were developed during the Great War to achieve a greater 
range than was possible with the hand grenade, Grenades were known in the 
15th century, but were obsolete by the 19th, only being revived in the 
Russo-Japanese War 1905. 
 
Grenades 
see "Grenade" 
 
Grenadier 
A Grenadier was originally a soldier specially trained for throwing 
grenades. 
 
Grumble 
see "SA-N-6" 
 
Guerrilla 
A guerrilla is an irregular soldier fighting in a small unofficial unit, 
typically against an established or occupying power, and engaging in 
sabotage, ambush, and the like, rather than pitched battles against an 
opposing army. 
The term was first applied to the Spanish and Portuguese resistance to 
French occupation during the Peninsular War. 
 
H-35 
The Hotchkiss H-35 was a French, light-support tank used during the 
second world war. It was armed with a 37mm main gun.  
 
H-39 
The Hotchkiss H-39 was a French light-support tank used during the second 
world war. It was armed with a 37mm main gun. 
 
Habergeon 
Habergeon was a sleevless jacket of chain-mail, shorter than the hauberk, 
and worn by squires and archers during the middle ages. 
 
Half-pike 
The half-pike was a defensive weapon composed of an iron spike fixed on a 
short ashen staff and used in the navy to repel boarders. 
 
Harpoon 
The harpoon is an American guided anti-ship missile. It has a range of 
102km and a flight speed of mach 0.75. The harpoon missile flies close to 
the sea level. 
 
Harrier 
The harrier is a British VTOL multi-role fighter aircraft.  
 
Hauberk 
The hauberk was a jacket of chain-mail with loose sleeves. There were two 
models, the small hauberk reached to the hips and had sleeves with 
extended to the elbow, and the large hauberk which reached down to the 
knees and had sleeves which extended a little below the elbow and also a 
hood.  
 
Heavy field artillery 
During the Great War, heavy field artillery was defined as comprising all 
artillery equipped with mobile guns of 4 inch calibre and upwards.  
 
Hellfire 
see "agm-114" 
 
Hk ohws 
The hk ohws is an offensive handgun from the Heckler and Koch company. It 
is a .45" calibre short recoil semi-automatic. It has a muzzle velocity 
of 270 m/s and a maximum effective range of 50m. It takes a 12-round 
magazine.  
 
Hk35 
The HK35 is a German automatic carbine manufactured by Heckler and Koch. 
It takes a 5.56mm round from a 40-round box. The muzzle velocity is 960 
m/s and it is sighted to 400m. It has a cyclic rate of 600rpm. 
 
Hollow-point bullet 
A hollow-point bullet is a bullet with a concavity in its nose to 
increase expansion on penetration of a solid target.  
 
Howitzer 
A howitzer is a cannon, in use since the 16th century, with a 
particularly steep angle of fire. Howitzers were developed during the 
Great War for demolishing the fortresses of the trench system.  
 
Human Torpedo 
The Human Torpedo was a two manned craft used by allied forces to attack 
shipping during the Second World War. It was first used by the Royal Navy 
in January 1943. It resembled a torpedo, the front being fitted with an 
explosive charge armed with a time fuse. This front charge would be fixed 
to the target vessel, and the crew would then steer the now headless 
craft away. 
 
Hussar 
The Hussars were the Hungarian cavalry raised in 1448 by Matthias I. 
Every twenty houses was obliged to furnish a man, and the word Hussar 
derives from huszar - husz being Hungarian for twenty. The term Hussar 
developed to refer to any light cavalry similarly dressed and armed of 
other European armies. 
 
IFV 
IFV is an abbreviation for infantry fighting vehicle. 
 
Ironclad 
An ironclad is a wooden warship covered with armor plate. The first to be 
constructed was the French Gloire in 1858, but the first to be launched 
was the British HMS Warrior in 1859. 
The first battle between ironclads took place during the American Civil 
War, when the Union Monitor fought the Confederate Virginia on the 9th of 
March 1862. The design was replaced by battleships of all-metal 
construction in the 1890s. 
 
JA 37 
The JA 37 is a swedish single-seat all-weather interceptor fighter 
aircraft with secondary strike capability. It is made by saab. 
 
JU 87B-1 
The JU 87B-1 was a German fighter-bomber used during the Second World 
War. It was manufactured by Junkers. It was armed with two 7.9mm MG 17 
machine guns in the wings, one 7.9mm MG 15 machine gun in the rear 
cockpit and it could carry a 1100lb bomb under the fuselage, or 4 110lb 
bombs on the wings. It had a crew of 2 and a top speed of 217mph. It had 
a range of 342 miles.  
 
KA-32 
The KA-32 is a Soviet shipboard anti-submarine warfare helicopter.  
 
Kamikaze 
Kamikaze were pilots of the Japanese air force in the second World War 
who deliberately crash-dived their planes, loaded with bombs, usually on 
to ships of the American Navy. 
A special force of suicide pilots was established 1944 to crash-dive 
planes, loaded with bombs, onto American and British ships. 
 
Kashin 
The Kashin class ship is a Soviet anti-aircraft warship. It was 
commisioned in 1962, and was the first class of warship to be equipped 
with gas turbines. It has a top speed of 37 knots. Its armament includes 
10 torpedoes, 22 SA-N-3 missiles and 4 SS-N-2c missiles.  
 
KGP-141 
The KGP-141 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The 
front sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGP-160 
The KGP-160 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 6" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The 
front sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGP-161 
The KGP-161 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 6" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable rear sight. The 
front sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-330 
The KGPF-330 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-331 
The KGPF-331 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-340 
The KGPF-340 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-341 
The KGPF-341 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.357" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-840 
The KGPF-840 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.38" special. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
KGPF-841 
The KGPF-841 is a Ruger revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a calibre of 
.38" special. It has a 6-round cylinder and fixed rear sight. The front 
sight can be interchanged.  
 
Kp88x 
The kp88x is a Ruger semi-automatic pistol. It is available in 9mm and 
.30" calibres and takes a 15-round magazine. 
 
Kp89 
The kp89 is a Ruger semi-automatic 9mm calibre pistol. It takes a 15-
round magazine.  
 
Krag-jorgensen m1896 
The krag-jorgensen m1896 was the US army's first bolt action rifle, 
seeing action in 1894. It has a muzzle velocity of 610 m/s and takes a 5-
round magazine. It is sighted to 1829m.  
 
KSK 
KSK is an abbreviation for Ethyl-iodo-acetate, a tear gas used during the 
second world war. It had a smell faintly of peardrops. It caused pain in 
the eyes, a copious flow of tears, spasms of the eyelids and irritation 
of shaved skin.  
 
Ksp-221 
The ksp-221 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 2.25" barrel and 
a calibre of .22" long rimfire. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable 
sights. 
 
Ksp-240 
The ksp-240 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a 
calibre of .22" long rimfire. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable 
sights.  
 
Ksp-241 
The ksp-241 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a 
calibre of .22" long rimfire. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable 
sights.  
 
Ksp-321x 
The ksp-321x is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 2.25" barrel and 
a calibre of .357" magnum. It has a 5-round cylinder and fixed sights.  
 
Ksp-3231 
The ksp-3231 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a 
calibre of .32" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable sights. 
 
Ksp-3241 
The ksp-3241 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 4" barrel and a 
calibre of .32" magnum. It has a 6-round cylinder and adjustable sights. 
 
Ksp-331x 
The ksp-331x is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a 
calibre of .357" magnum. It has a 5-round cylinder and fixed sights. 
 
Ksp-821 
The ksp-821 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 2.25" barrel and 
a calibre of .38". It has a 5-round cylinder and fixed sights. 
 
Ksp-921 
The ksp-921 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 2.25" barrel and 
a calibre of 9mm. It has a 5-round cylinder and fixed sights.  
 
Ksp-931 
The ksp-931 is a Ruger double-action revolver. It has a 3" barrel and a 
calibre of 9mm. It has a 5-round cylinder and fixed sights. 
 
Ksrh-7 
The ksrh-7 is the 7.5" barrel super redhawk revolver. 
 
Ksrh-9 
The ksrh-9 is a super redhawk 9.5" barrel revolver. 
 
L119 
The l119 is a British 105mm calibre towed howitzer. It has a range of 
17,200m.  
 
L1a1 
The l1a1 is a British gas operated rifle with a muzzle velocity of 854 
m/s and sighted to 549m. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 20-round box.  
 
L2a3 
The l2a3 was developed from 1942 onwards as a replacement sub-machine gun 
for the sten. It is a British weapon often known as the patchett after 
its designer. It takes a 9mm round from a 32-round box. It has a cyclic 
rate of 550 rpm and a muzzle velocity of 365 m/s.  
 
L4a1 
The l4a1 is a British sniper rifle developed from the number 4 rifle. It 
takes a 7.62mm round from a 10-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 838 
m/s and takes a telescopic sight.  
 
Lance 
see "mgm-52c" 
 
Lanchester mk1 
The lanchester mk1 was a British sub-machine gun issued to the navy from 
1940. It takes a 9mm round from a 50-round box and has a cyclic rate of 
600rpm. The muzzle velocity is 365 m/s.  
 
Lathi 
A lathi is an Indian weapon consisting of a heavy stick, usually bamboo, 
bound with iron. 
 
Law 
Law is an abbreviation for light anti-tank weapon.  
 
Le mat 
The le mat revolver fired grapeshot and was manufactured mainly in france 
in the mid 19th century.  
 
Lebel 
The lebel is a French rifle developed in 1886. It is bolt operated and 
takes a 8mm round from a 8-round tubular magazine. The muzzle velocity is 
716 m/s and it is sighted to 2000m.  
 
Lee enfield 
The lee enfield is a series of British rifles. The mark 3 and 4 are bolt 
operation and take a .303" round from a 10-round box. The muzzle velocity 
is 738 m/s and they are sighted to 1829m.  
 
Lee straight pull 
The lee straight pull is a US straight-pull operated rifle issued to the 
navy in 1895. It takes a .236" round from a 5-round magazine. It has a 
muzzle velocity of 732 m/s and is sighted to 1828m. 
 
Lee-Metford 
The Lee-Metford series of rifles were adopted by the British army in 1888 
to replace the martini-Henry. They were bolt-action rifles which took a 
5-round box magazine. 
 
Lever-action 
Lever-action is a gun mechanism activated by manual operation of a lever. 
 
Liberator pistol 
The liberator pistol was a cheaply made pistol made in America in 1942 
for supply to guerilla forces in enemy countries.  
 
Locust tank 
see "m22" 
 
Luger 
Luger were a range of automatic pistols manufactured by DWM from 1908 
onwards. Originaly a 7.65mm calibre pistol, various versions were made. 
The artillery luger was a German 9mm calibre automatic pistol introduced 
in 1917. It took a 8-round box magazine. 
 
M/46 
The M/46 is the Browning High Power Pistol manufactured in Denmark. 
 
M1 
The m1 is a US gas operated carbine. It takes a .30" straight pistol type 
round from a 15/30-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 585 m/s and has 
fixed sights set at 275m. 
 
M102 
The m102 is an American 105mm calibre light-howitzer. It has a range of 
11,500m with standard ammunition and 15,100m with rap ammunition. 
 
M109 
The m109 is a series of American self-propelled howitzers. They have a 
top speed of 35mph.  
 
M109a2 
The m109a2 is one of the m109 series. It is armed with a 155mm howitzer 
and browning 0.5" calibre anti-aircraft machine gun.  
 
M109a3 
The m109a3 is one of the m109 series. It is armed with a m185 howitzer 
and a browning 0.5" calibre anti-aircraft machine gun. 
 
M109a6 
The m109a6 is one of the m109 series. It is armed with a m284 howitzer 
and a browning 0.5" calibre anti-aircraft machine gun. 
 
M110 
The m110 is a series of American self-propelled howitzers. They first 
entered service in 1963. They are armed with a 8" howitzer and have a top 
speed of 34mph. 
 
M110a1 
see "m110" 
 
M110a2 
see "m110" 
 
M113 
The m113 is a series of American apcs. They are lightly armed with a 
browning 0.5" calibre machine gun. They have a top speed of 40mph. 
 
M114 
The m114 is an American 155mm calibre howitzer series first used during 
the second world war. The m114a2 model has a range of 19,300m.  
 
M114a2 
see "m114" 
 
M119 
The m119 is the American designation for the l119.  
 
M14 
The m14 is a US automatic rifle developed in the 1950s to replace the 
garand. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 20-round box. It has a muzzle 
velocity of 853 m/s and is sighted to 915m with a cyclic rate of 750 rpm.  
 
M16 
The m16 (armalite ar-15) is a US automatic rifle. It takes a .233" round 
from a 30-round magazine. It has a muzzle velocity of 991 m/s and is 
sighted to 458m. It has a cyclic rate of 800 rpm. 
 
M163 
The m163 (vulcan) is an American air defence system. It is mounted on a 
m113 tracked chassis and consists of a 20mm cannon and radar detection 
equipment. The cannon has a range of 1750 yards. 
 
M1911A1 
The M1911A1 was a .45 inch calibre automatic pistol designed by Browning 
in 1911 and manufactured by Colt. It had a semi-automatic recoil action 
and took a 7-round magazine. 
 
M1935A 
The M1935A was the standard pistol of the French army during the second 
World War. It was a 7.65 mm calibre semi-automatic pistol with a recoil-
operation. It took an 8-round magazine. 
 
M198 
The m198 is an American 155mm calibre towed howitzer with a range of 
22,000m with standard ammunition and 30,000m with rap ammunition.  
 
M1a1 
The m1a1 is a folding stock version of the m1.  
 
M1a1 MBT 
The m1a1 MBT is a US tank. It takes a four man crew and is armed with a 
120mm smoothbore gun, a 7.62mm coaxial machine gun, a 12.7Mm roof mounted 
heavy machine gun and a 7.62mm roof mounted machine gun. It is equiped 
with a laser rangefinder and thermal imaging night sights. 40 shells are 
carried for the main gun. It has a top road speed of 67 kph. Defenses 
include chobham armour and a laser warning system.  
 
M2 
The m2 is an American ifv. It is armed with a 25mm hughes machine gun and 
a 7.62mm coaxial machine gun and carries 2 tow atgms. It has a top speed 
of 40mph.  
 
M22 
The m22 (locust) tank was a light American tank used during the second 
world war. It was manned by a crew of three and was armed with a 37mm 
gun. 
 
M224 
The m224 is an American lightweight company mortar. It has a calibre of 
60mm and a range of 3,500m. 
 
M24 
The m24 (chaffee) was a light, air-portable American tank used during the 
second world war. It was manned by a crew of five and was armed with a 
75mm gun. It had a top speed of around 30mph.  
 
M240 
The m240 is a Belgian medium machine gun fitted to the m1a1 MBT and other 
tanks. It has a muzzle velocity of 840 m/s. 
 
M249 
The m249 is an American saw. It has a calibre of 5.56mm and a range of 
1300m. It has a cyclic rate of 750rpm and a muzzle velocity of 924m/s. 
 
M29 
The M29 is a family of American mortars.  
 
M29A1 
The M29A1 is one of the M29 family. It has a calibre of 81mm and a range 
of 4,700km. It has a sustained rate of fire of between 4 and 12 rpm. 
 
M3 
The M3 is an American CFV version of the m2. It carries additional atgms 
instead of passengers and has slightly thicker armour. 
 
M47 
The M47 (dragon) is an American infantry anti-tank/assault missile. It 
has a flight speed of 230mph and a range of 1000m. It is guided by the 
operator. 
 
M48 
The M48 (chaparral) is an American forward area air-defense missile 
system. It launches surface-to-air missiles which use infrared homing to 
target heat emiiter guidance. The missiles fly at a speed of mach 2.5 to 
a ceiling of 2,500m and a range of 4,800m.  
 
M551 
The M551 (sheridan) is an American light tank. It entered service in 
1966. It is armed with a 152mm main gun and a 7.62mm calibre coaxial 
machine gun and a 0.5" calibre anti-aircraft machine gun. It has a top 
speed of 65mph.  
 
M6 Scout 
The M6 Scout is An over-under combo gun chambered in .22LR (or .22 
Hornet) and .410. It is 32 inches long with an 18 inch long barrel and 
includes a folding stock. The M6 Scout is marketed by Springfield as a 
survival rifle.  
 
M60 
The m60 is a series of American tanks. The series entered service in 
1960. 
The m60 general-purpose machine-gun is an American weapon. It has a 
calibre of 7.62mm and a maximum range of 1800m with a rate of fire of 
550rpm.  
 
M60a3 MBT 
The m60a3 MBT is a US tank. It was designed in 1956 and entered service 
in 1960. It is armed with a 105mm main gun, a 7.62mm coaxial machine gun 
and a cupola mounted 12.7Mm hmg. It has a top road speed of 48kph. It is 
manned by a crew of four and carries 63 rounds of main gun ammunition. It 
is fitted with a laser rangefinder and thermal imaging night sight. 
 
M712 
The m712 (copperhead) is an American cannoN-launched guided projectile. 
It flies at supersonic speed and uses laser homing guidance to locate its 
target. It has a range of up to 10 miles. 
 
M72a2 
The M72a2 is an American LAW. It has a calibre of 66mm and a range of 
325m. 
 
M72a3 
The M72a3 is a US infantry anti-tank missile. It lacks a guidance system 
and is only usable up to 135 meters. 
 
M77 
The M77 is a Ruger bolt-action rifle. It is manufactured in various 
calibres between .22" and .338". It takes a 4-round magazine and is 
fitted with a receiver for a telscopic sight. 
 
M79 
The M79 is an American grenade launcher. It has a range of 400m and a 
rate of fire of 5 rpm.  
 
M9 
The M9 is a 9mm semi-automatic pistol manufactured by Beretta, and 
adopted by the American military in place of the m1911.  
 
M93 
The M93 (fox) is an American reconnaissance vehicle. It carries a crew of 
4. It is unarmed and has a top speed of 65mph.  
 
Machine gun 
A machine gun is a firearm of military significance, often crew-served, 
that on trigger depression automatically feeds and fires cartridges of 
rifle size or greater. 
 
Madsen M50 
The madsen M50 is a Danish sub-machine gun. It takes a 9mm round from a 
32-round box. It has a cyclic rate of 550rpm and a muzzle velocity of 365 
m/s.  
 
Magazine 
A magazine is a spring-loaded container for cartridges that may be an 
integral part of the guns mechanism or may be detachable. Detachable 
magazines for the same gun may be offered by the gun's manufacturer or 
other manufacturers with various capacities. A gun with a five-shot 
detachable magazine, for instance, may be fitted with a magazine holding 
10, 20, or 50 or more rounds. Box magazines are most commonly located 
under the receiver with the cartridges stacked vertically. 
Tube or tubular magazines run through the stock or under the barrel with 
the cartridges lying horizontally. Drum magazines hold their cartridges 
in a circular mode. A magazine can also mean a secure storage place for 
ammunition or explosives. 
 
Magnum 
Magnum is a term indicating a relatively heavily loaded metallic 
cartridge or shotshell and, by extension, a gun safely constructed to 
fire it. 
 
Male 
Male was one of the first British tanks. It was fitted with six pounder 
guns and SAW action during the first world war. 
 
Mannlicher-Carcano m1891 
The Mannlicher-Carcano m1891 is an Italian bolt operated carbine designed 
for cavalry use, but with a folding bayonet fixed under the barrel. It 
takes a 6.5Mm round from a 6-round magazine. The muzzle velocity is 701 
m/s and it is sighted to 1500m.  
 
Mannlicher-Carcano m1938 
The Mannlicher-Carcano m1938 is an Italian carbine with sights fixed at 
300m. It takes a 6.5Mm round from a 6-round magazine. It is bolt operated 
and has a muzzle velocity of 701 m/s. 
 
Martini-Henry 
The martini-Henry was the first metal cartridge breech-loading rifle 
built for the British army. It was adopted in 1871. It had a calibre of 
0.45" and took a bottle-necked cartridge.  
 
Mas36 
The fusil mas36 is a French rifle developed in the 1940s. It takes a 
7.5Mm round from a 5-round box. The operation is bolt. It has a muzzle 
velocity of 823 m/s and is sighted to 1200m.  
 
Matchlock 
The English matchlock was a smooth-bore muzzle loader gun in use during 
the late 17th century. It was fired from a rest called a pike.  
 
Matilda 
The matilda was a British tank of the second world war. It was hopelessly 
under-armed with a two-pounder gun, but it's thick armour offered good 
protection against German tanks and anti-tank guns. The mk1 had a top 
speed of 8mph and the mk2 a top speed of 15mph.  
 
Meiji carbine 
The Meiji carbine is a Japanese bolt operated carbine. It takes a 6.5Mm 
round from a 5-round magazine. It has a muzzle velocity of 732 m/s and is 
sighted to 2000m. 
 
Mercenary 
A mercenary is a soldier hired by the army of another country or by a 
private army. Mercenary military service originated in the 14th century, 
when cash payment on a regular basis was the only means of guaranteeing 
soldiers' loyalty. 
 
Mgm-52c 
The mgm-52c (lance) is an American battlefield support missile. It has a 
range of between 45 and 75 miles depending upon the warhead and is 
carried by the m752 (m113) carrier. The missile flies at a speed of mach 
3. 
 
Mi-14 
The mi-14 is a Soviet amphibious anti-submarine helicopter. 
 
Mi-17 
The mi-17 is a Soviet medium transport helicopter.  
 
Mi-24 
The mi-24 is a Soviet assault and anti-armour helicopter. 
 
Mi-26 
The mi-26 is a Soviet military and commercial heavy-lift helicopter.  
 
Mi-8 
The mi-8 is a Soviet assault transport helicopter.  
 
MICV 
An MICV (mechanized infantry combat vehicle) is a tracked military 
vehicle designed to fight as part of an armored battle group. It is armed 
with a quick-firing cannon and one or more machine guns. MICVs have now 
replaced armored personnel carriers. 
 
Mig 
The mig are various military aircraft of Soviet origin. 
 
Mig-23 
The mig-23 is a Soviet single-seat air superiority and close air support 
fighter aircraft.  
 
Mig-25 
The mig-25 is a Soviet single-seat interceptor fighter aircraft.  
 
Mig-27 
The mig-27 is a Soviet single-seat tactical strike and close air support 
fighter aircraft.  
 
Mills bomb 
The Mills bomb was the standard British hand grenade used during the 
Great War and Second World War. It weighed 1.5 lbs and could be thrown 30 
yards. During the Spanish civil war, mills bombs proved effective against 
light tanks. 
 
Mim-104 
The mim-104 (patriot) is an American surface to air missile system. The 
missiles fly at a speed of mach 3 to a range of 68km. 
 
Mine 
A mine is an explosive charge on land or sea, or in the atmosphere, 
designed to be detonated by contact, vibration, magnetic influence, or a 
timing device. 
 
Minesweeper 
A minesweeper is a small naval vessel designed for locating and 
destroying mines at sea.  
 
Mini-14/5 
The mini-14/5 is a Ruger ranch rifle. It is a gas operated .223" calibre 
weapon taking a 5-round box magazine. It has a muzzle velocity of 
3300fps. 
 
Minie 
The Minie was a .702 inch calibre muzzle loading, percussion lock rifle. 
It was issued to the British army in 1851 to replace the Brunswick Rifle. 
The Minie was manufactured by Tower and sighted to 820m. 
 
Minuteman 
The Minuteman is an American three stage Inter-Continental Ballistic 
missile with a range of about 8000km.  
 
Mitrailleuse 
The Mitrailleuse was a machinegun introduced in France shortly before the 
Franco-German war of 1870-1871. It consisted of a number of rifled 
barrels, generally thirty-seven, and was mounted similarly to an ordinary 
field-piece. 
 
MK19-3 
The MK19-3 is an American automatic grenade launcher. It has a range of 
1500m and a rate of fire of 325-375 rpm.  
 
MLRS 
MLRS is an abbreviation for multiple-launch rocket system. It is an 
American weapon system being a mobile vehicle which carries 12 rocket 
launchers. The rockets have a range of about 19miles and fly at a 
supersonic speed. 
 
Model 1853 
The Model 1853 was a reduced calibre form of the Minie. It was a .577 
inch calibre muzzle loading, percussion cap rifle manufactured by Enfield 
from 1853. It was sighted to 730m.  
 
Moltke 
The Moltke was a German cruiser. It was sunk by a British submarine 
during the battle for riga, on august the 18th 1915.  
 
Mondragon 
The Mondragon automatic rifle was one of the first automatic rifles 
invented. It was patented in 1907 by manuel mondragon of mexico. It had a 
calibre of 7mm. 
 
Monitor 
A monitor was a very shallow, heavily-armed, iron-clad steam-vessel 
invented by Ericcson, carrying on its open decks either one or two 
revolving turrets, each containing one or more enormous guns and designed 
to combine the maximum fire-power with the minimum of exposure. The 
vessels got their name after the first one, built during the American 
civil war, proved its superiority during an engagement with the Merrimac 
in 1862.  
 
Monkey Tail 
The Monkey Tail was a .45 inch calibre, breech-loading, single capping 
carbine manufactured by Enflied in 1863. It had an effective range of 
350m.  
 
Mortar 
A mortar is a machine for projecting a bomb via a high trajectory at a 
remote target. 
 
Mosin-Nagant M1944 
The Mosin-Nagant M1944 is a Soviet carbine. It is bolt operated and takes 
a 7.62mm round from a 5-round magazine. It has a muzzle velocity of 823 
m/s and is sighted to 1000m.  
 
Mosquito 
The De Havilland Mosquito was an English two-seat fighter bomber 
aircraft. It was made completely of wood, which made it very easy to 
repair following attacks. It had a top speed of 400mph making it the 
fastest aircraft in the Second World War.  
 
Mother 
Mother was the name of the first prototype tank.  
 
Mp40 
The mp40 was a German sub-machine gun which SAW extensive use during the 
second world war. It takes a 9mm round from a 32-round box. Its cyclic 
rate is 500rpm and it has a muzzle velocity of 365 m/s. 
 
Mp44 
The mp44 is a German assault rifle. It takes a 7.92mm round from a 30-
round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 647 m/s and is sighted to 800m. It 
was developed in 1944 and influenced the development of the ak47. It has 
a cyclic rate of 500rpm. 
 
Musket 
A musket was a hand-gun first introduced in the early 16th century as a 
development of the culverin and arquebus. It was discharged by means of a 
lighted match, which gave rise to its name matchlock. It was so heavy 
that it had to be laid across a staff or rest to be fired. To make use of 
it the soldier needed to carry a lighted slow-burning match, which was 
apt to be extinguished in wet weather. This was developed into the wheel-
lock which was a wheel made to revolve by a spring and which caused 
sparks by friction against a flint. In 1625 the musket developed the 
flint-lock.  
 
Musketoon 
A musketoon was a short thick musket with a very wide bore, sometime 
bell-mouthed like a blunderbuss. It fired a ball weighing between 5 and 
7.5 ounces.  
 
Mustard gas 
Mustard gas, Di-chloro-di-ethyl sulphide, is a blister gas used during 
the Great War. It has a faint smell of mustard. It has a delayed action 
which makes it so dangerous, it not being detected until it has already 
caused its damage. It rapidly damages the eyes, lungs and exposed parts 
of the body. Blisters appear on exposed skin after a few hours. The 
stomach and intestines can be damaged by eating food contaminated with 
the gas. Exposure to the gas often results in death or blindness. 
 
Muzzle 
The muzzle is the open end of the barrel of a gun from which the 
projectile exits.  
 
Muzzle loader 
The muzzle loader was the earliest type of gun, now also popular as 
modern-made replicas, in which blackpowder and projectile(s) are 
separately 
loaded in through the muzzle. The term is often applied to cap-and-ball 
revolvers where the loading is done not actually through the 
muzzle but through the open ends of the cylinder's chambers. 
 
Napalm 
Napalm is a fuel used in incendiary bombs and flame throwers. It is 
produced from jellied petrol, and is a mixture of naphthenic and palmitic 
acids. Napalm causes extensive burns because it sticks to the skin even 
when ignited. It was widely used by the American Army during the Vietnam 
War. 
 
Needle Fire Rifle 
The Needle Fire Rifle was first issued to the Prussian army in 1848. It 
was a bolt-action 15.43mm calibre rifle sighted to 400m.  
 
Nelson 
The Nelson was a British battleship of the Second World War. It was armed 
with 9 16 guns. She had a top speed of 23 knots and carried a crew of 
1300. 
 
New land pattern 
The new land pattern was a musket of the brown bess family introduced in 
the middle of the napoleonic wars. It had a calibre of 0.75".  
 
New Model Army Revolver 
The New Model Army Revolver was a .44 inch calibre muzzle loaded, single-
action revolver manufactured by Colt in 1860. It had a 6-round cylinder. 
 
Nimrod 
The nimrod is a British long-range maritime patrol aircraft.  
 
Number 4 
The number 4 rifle is a British rifle manufactured from 1941. It takes a 
.303" round from a 10-round box. Operation is bolt. It has a muzzle 
velocity of 743 
M/s and is sighted to 1189m. 
 
Okha 
The Okha was a specifically designed piloted flying bomb developed for 
use by Japanese Kamikaze squads. 
 
Old Model Army Revolver 
see "Dragoon" 
 
Owen 
The Owen machine-carbine was developed for use in jungle warfare. It was 
an Australian weapon. It takes a 9mm round from a 32-round box. It has a 
cyclic rate of 700rpm and a muzzle velocity of 420 m/s. 
 
P-12 
The P-12 is a semi-automatic pistol based upon the browning m1911. It 
takes a 12-round .45" calibre magazine. 
 
P-14 
The P-14 is a semi-automatic pistol based upon the browning m1911. It 
takes a 14-round .45" calibre magazine. 
 
P38 
The Walther P38 is a 9 mm calibre recoil-operated semi-automatic pistol 
manufactured by Walther since 1938. It was adopted by the German army in 
1938 and is still in use by the Chilean, Norwegian, Portugese and German 
armed forces. It takes an 8-round magazine. 
 
P89 
The p89 is a Ruger semi-automatic pistol. It has a calibre of 9mm and 
takes a 15-round magazine.  
 
Panzer 
The term "panzer" is a shortening of the full German title 
"panzerkampfwagen", which translates to "armoured war wagon".  
 
Panzer 2 
The panzer 2 was a German light-weight reconnaisance tank used during the 
second world war. It carried a three man crew and was armed with a 20mm 
gun.  
 
Panzer 3 
The panzer 3 was a German MBT of the second world war. It was initialy 
armed with a 37mm anti-tank gun, but this was upgraded to a 50mm gun 
after 1940. It was manned by a five man crew. 
 
Panzer 4 
The panzer 4 was a German assault and infantry support tank of the second 
world war. It was initialy armed with a low velocity, short-barrelled 
75mm gun. Later versions carried longer guns. It was manned by a crew of 
five.  
 
Panzerfaust 
The panzerfaust was a German anti-tank missile of the Second World War. 
It was infantry carried and had a range of 50m. 
 
Parma 
The parma was a small round or oval flat shield used by the Romans. 
 
Patchett 
see "l2a3" 
 
Paterson 
The paterson was an 8-shot revolving rifle made by Colt. It was adopted 
by the American army in 1838. 
 
Patriot 
see "mim-104" 
 
Pattern 1913 
The pattern 1913 rifle is a British rifle developed in 1913. It takes a 
.276" round from a 5-round box. It is bolt operated and has a 
Muzzle velocity of 843 m/s. It is sighted to 1738m. 
 
Pepper-Box 
The Pepper-Box was a multiple barreled pistol effective at close range. 
They typically had six barrels, and were muzzle loading and fired by 
percussion cap.  
 
Pepperbox 
The pepperbox was a multiple barreled percussion pistol made between 1830 
and 1860 throughout europe. 
 
Phoenix 
Phoenix is a British RPV. 
 
Phosgene 
Phosgene is a lung irritant gas used during the Second World War. It has 
a smell of musty hay. It is a very poisonous gas.  
 
PIAT 
The PIAT was a British infantry anti-tank missile used during the Second 
World War. It had a range of 100m. 
 
Pilum 
The pilum was a Roman weapon similar to a pike or javelin. It was about 6 
feet long and was usually thrown at the enemy.  
 
Pistole 640 
The Pistole 640 was the Browning High Power Pistol manufactured in Liege 
for the German SS during the Second World War. 
 
PPD 34 
The PPD 34 was a Soviet sub-machine gun. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 
71-round drum. It has a cyclic rate of 800rpm and a muzzle velocity of 
489 m/s. 
 
PPK 
The Walther PPK is an automatic pistol originaly designed for police 
detectives in 1931. It has a calibre of 7.65mm and takes a 7-round 
magazine. It has a blowback double action. Various alternative calibre 
versions are now made including .22 inch, 6.35mm and 9mm.  
 
PPSH 41 
The PPSH 41 was a Soviet sub-machine gun developed during the second 
world war. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 71 drum/35-round box. It has a 
cyclic rate of 900rpm and a muzzle velocity of 489 m/s. 
 
Pre-land pattern 
The pre-land pattern was an early musket of the brown bess family. It had 
a calibre of 0.75". 
 
Primer 
Primer is the ignition component of a cartridge, generally made up of a 
metallic fulminate or (currently) lead styphnate. 
 
Q Ships 
Q Ships were warships masquerading as unarmed merchant ships. They thus 
lured enemy submarines to their destruction. Q Ships were first used by 
the British during the First World War when they were commanded by Vice 
Admiral Gordon Campbell.  
 
Quarrel 
A quarrel was a bolt or dart to be shot from a cross-bow, or thrown 
thrown a catapult. It had a square head and a pyramidal point.  
 
Quarter staff 
The Quarter staff was an old English weapon formed of a stout pole about 
6.5 feet long and generally loaded with iron at both ends. In use it was 
held by one hand in the centre, and the other hand between the centre and 
the end. In the attack the latter hand was shifted from one quarter of 
the staff to the other, giving the weapon a rapid circular motion. 
 
R-35 
The Renault R-35 was a French light-support tank used during the second 
world war. It was armed with a 37mm main gun. 
 
Rapier 
A rapier is a light slender sword for thrusting only. It usually has a 
cylindrical blade with a sharp point, but no edge. 
 
Rapparee 
A rapparee was a 17th century Irish irregular soldier.  
 
Receiver (firearm) 
The receiver is the housing for a firearm's breech and firing mechanism.  
 
Redeye 
see "fim-43a" 
 
Redhawk 
The Ruger redhawk is a range of .44" magnum calibre revolvers. They have 
a 6-round cylinder and can be fitted with a telescopic sight.  
 
Revolver 
A revolver is a gun, usually a handgun, with a multi-chambered cylinder 
that rotates to successively align each chamber with a single barrel and 
firing pin.  
 
Rh-44 
The rh-44 is a 7.5" barrel redhawk. 
 
Rh-445 
The rh-445 is a 5.5" barrel redhawk.  
 
Rifle 
A rifle is a firearm with spiral, parallel grooves cut into the bore to 
impart spin in the projectile giving flight stability to the projectile.  
 
Rimfire 
Rimfire is a rimmed or flanged cartridge with the priming mixture located 
inside the rim of the case. The most famous example is the .22 rimfire. 
 
Ross 
The ross rifle is a British rifle taking a .303" round from a 5-round 
box. Operation is straight pull. The muzzle velocity is 794 m/s and it is 
sighted to 1098m. 
 
Royal Oak 
The Royal Oak was a British battleship. She was armed with 8 15 inch 
guns, 12 6 inch guns, 8 4 inch anti-aircraft guns and 16 2 pounder anti-
aircraft guns. She had a top speed of 21.5 knots. She carried a crew of 
1146. She was sunk by U-47 whilst she was anchored at Scapa Flow on 13th 
October 1939. 
 
Rpg-16 
The rpg-16 is a Soviet infantry anti-tank missile introduced in the 1970s 
to replace the rpg-7. It has a 58mm war head which is effective at ranges 
up to 800 meters. 
It has a flight speed of 350 m/s but no guidance system.  
 
RPG-7 
The RPG-7 is a famous Soviet infantry anti-tank missile. It has an 85mm 
war head which is effective at ranges up to 500 meters. 
It has a flight speed of 300 m/s but no guidance system.  
 
RPV 
RPV (remotely piloted vehicle) are crewless mini-aircraft used for 
military surveillance and to select targets in battle. RPVs barely show 
up on radar, enabling them to fly over a battlefield without being shot 
down, and they are equipped to transmit TV images to an operator on the 
ground.  
 
Ruger 
Ruger is an American small arms manufacturer. 
 
S-35 
The Somua S-35 was a French medium tank used during the second world war. 
It was armed with a 47mm gun. 
 
S-70 
The S-70 is an American tactical transport helicopter. It is nicknamed 
the black hawk.  
 
S100 
The S100 was a German sub-machine gun manufactured after the Great War. 
It takes a 9mm round from a 32-round box and has a cyclic rate of 500rpm. 
Its muzzle velocity is 417 m/s. 
 
SA-N-3 
The SA-N-3 (goblet) is a Soviet surface-to-air missile developed in 1967. 
It has a range of 55km and a flight speed of mach 2.  
 
SA-N-4 
The SA-N-4 (gecko) is a Soviet surface-to-air missile. It has a range of 
15km and a flight speed of mach 2. 
 
SA-N-5 
The SA-N-5 (grail) is a light-weight Soviet surface-to-air missile 
deployed in light amphibious craft and capable of being shoulder launched 
by infantry. It has a range of 10km and a flight speed of mach 1.  
 
SA-N-6 
The SA-N-6 (grumble) is a Soviet surface-to-air missile. It has a range 
of 81km and a flight speed of mach 3. 
 
Saam 
see "Saam_class" 
 
Saam class 
The Saam class is an Iranian frigate. It has a top speed of 39knots. It 
is armed with 9 seacat missiles and 5 sea killer missiles.  
 
Sabot 
Sabot is a lightweight carrier surrounding a heavier projectile of 
reduced caliber, allowing a firearm to shoot ammunition for which it is 
not chambered. For example, a hunter could use his .30-30 deer rifle to 
shoot small game with .22 centerfire bullets.  
 
SAR-4800 
The Springfield SAR-4800 rifle is a .308" caliber, gas operated military 
rifle. 
 
SAR-8 
The Springfield SAR-8 rifle is a .308" caliber, recoil operated semi-
automatic sporting rifle.  
 
Saw 
Saw is an abbreviation for squad automatic weapon. It is a new type of 
weapon similar to an automatic rifle but with a greater range, but not as 
heavy as a general purpose machine-gun.  
 
Saw SAW is an abbreviation for squad automatic weapon. It is a new type 
of weapon similar to an a 
tomatic rifle but with a greater range, but not as heavy as a general 
purpose machine-gun.  
 
Scud 
The Scud is a Soviet-produced surface-to-surface missile that can be 
armed with a nuclear, chemical, or conventional warhead. 
The Scud-B has a range of 300 km. 
 
Scutum 
The scutum was a large oblong Roman shield. 
 
Sea dart 
The sea dart is a British anti-ship and surface-to-air missile. It has a 
range of 17km and a flight speed of mach 3.  
 
Sea killer 
The sea killer is an Italian anti-ship missile. It has a range of 25km 
and uses beam-riding and radar altimeter guidance systems. It flies close 
to the seas surface making it an effective weapon. 
 
Sea sparrow 
The sea sparrow is an American surface-to-air missile. It has a range of 
32km and a flight speed of mach 3. 
 
Sea wolf 
The sea wolf is a British surface-to-air missile. It has a range of 6km 
and a flight speed of mach 2. It is usually fired from a multi-barrel 
launcher, but on British type 23 frigates they are launched from a vls 
system.  
 
Seacat 
The seacat is a British anti-air missile. It has a range of 6km and is 
guided either optically or by radar. 
 
Selective-fire 
Selective-fire is a firearm's ability to be fired fully automatically, 
semi-automatically or, in some cases, in burst-fire mode at the option of 
the firer. 
 
Semi-automatic 
A semi-automatic firearm is designed to fire a single cartridge, eject 
the empty case and reload the chamber each time the trigger is pulled. 
 
Semtex 
Semtex is an odourless plastic explosive manufactured in Czechoslovakia 
that can only be ignited by a detonator.  
 
Sharps Carbine 
The Sharps Carbine was a .53 inch calibre breech loading carbine used by 
the Americans during the American Civil War. It had an effective range of 
450m.  
 
Sheridan 
see "m551" 
 
Sherman tank 
The Sherman tank was an American tank used during the second world war. 
There were numerous variations made. It was manned by a crew of five. It 
was well armed with a 75mm gun and and co-axial machine gun in the 
turret. A hull mounted machine gun and cupola mounted machine gun were 
also fitted. It could achieve a top speed of 26mph.  
 
Shotgun 
A shotgun is a shoulder gun with smooth-bored barrel(s) primarily 
intended for firing multiple small, round projectiles, (shot, birdshot, 
pellets), larger shot (buck shot), single round balls (pumpkin balls) and 
cylindrical slugs. Some shotgun barrels have rifling to give better 
accuracy with slugs or greater pattern spread to birdshot.  
 
Sikorsky 
Sikorsky is an American helicopter manufacturer.  
 
Silkworm 
The silkworm is a Chinese anti-ship missile. Its range and speed are 
believed to be a range of 46km and a flight speed of mach 0.9, but these 
are unconfirmed.  
 
Single-shot 
Single-shot is a gun mechanism lacking a magazine where separately 
carried ammunition must be manually placed in the gun's chamber for each 
firing. 
 
SKS 
The SKS is a Soviet gas operated self-loading rifle. It takes a 7.62mm 
round from a 10-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 735 m/s and is 
sighted to 1000m.  
 
Slide-action 
Slide-action is a gun mechanism activated by manual operation of a 
horizontally sliding handle almost always located under the barrel. 
"Pump-action" and "trombone" are synonyms for "slide-action."  
 
Sm-1 
The sm-1 is an American surface-to-air missile. It has a range of 33km 
and a flight speed of mach 2.  
 
Sm-2 
The sm-2 is an American guided surface-to-air missile. It has a range of 
59km and a flight speed of mach 2. It uses an interial guidance system 
and is equipped with an auto-pilot for effectiveness against evasive 
targets. 
 
Smith & Wesson Model No. 1 
The Smith & Wesson Model No. 1 was the first revolver manufactured by 
Smith & Wesson. It was a .22 inch calibre, single-action, rimfire 
revolver with a 7-round cylinder. 
 
Snub-nosed 
Snub-nosed is a descriptive of (usually) a revolver with an unusually 
short barrel. 
 
Sopwith Camel 
The Sopwith Camel was a single seater fighter scout biplane. It first 
flew in December 1916 and saw action during the Great War.  
 
Southampton 
The Southampton was a British cruiser of the Second World War. She was 
armed with 12 6 inch guns and anti-aircraft guns.  
 
Spencer 
The Spencer was the first successful repeating rifle. It was manufactured 
in 1862 by the Spencer repeating Rifle Company, in the USA. The Spencer 
was a lever-action, rolling block rifle with a 7-round tube magazine in 
the butt. It had an effective range of 275 m. 
 
Springfield 
The springfield is a US bolt operated rifle in general issue from 1906 
replacing the krag-jorgensen m1896. It takes a .30" round from a 5-round 
box. It has a muzzle velocity of 813 m/s and is sighted to 2469m. 
 
SS-N-2a 
The SS-N-2a (styx) is a Soviet anti-ship missile. It has a range of 46km 
and a flight speed of mach 0.9. It carries a 1100lb warhead. 
 
SS-N-2c 
The SS-N-2c is a Soviet anti-ship missile. It has a range of 80km and a 
flight speed ofr mach 0.9. The SS-N-2c is an updated version of the SS-N-
2a, and includes sea skimming abilities for avoiding detection by radar. 
 
Sten 
The sten was a British sub-machine gun which went through a number of 
changes and variations from its development in 1941. It takes a 9mm round 
from a 32- 
Round box and has a cyclic rate of 550rpm. 
 
Stinger 
see "fim-92a" 
 
Stuart tank 
The Stuart tank was an American tank used during the second world war. It 
was crewed by four men, had a top speed of 36mph and was lightly armed 
with a 37mm gun and two machine guns.  
 
Styx 
see "SS-N-2a" 
 
Submachine gun 
A submachine gun is an automatic firearm commonly firing pistol 
ammunition intended for close-range combat. 
 
Suomi m1931 
The Suomi m1931 is a Finnish sub-machine gun developed in 1931. It takes 
a 9mm round from a variety of magazines. Its cyclic rate is 900rpm and 
its muzzle velocity 400 m/s.  
 
Super Redhawk 
The Ruger Super Redhawk is a .44" magnum calibre revolver. It has either 
a 7.5" or 9.5" barrel. The cylinder takes 6-rounds.  
 
Sword 
A sword is an offensive weapon designed for cutting and thrusting. It 
consists of a long straight or curved blade with a handle or hilt and a 
cross-guard and usually a sharp point.  
 
T2e1 
The t2e1 is a British rifle taking a .276" round from a 10-round box. The 
muzzle velocity is 762 m/s and it is sighted to 1098m. Operation is 
blowback. 
 
Tank 
Tank was the codename of the British armoured fighting vehicles which 
were envisaged as land warships.  
 
Targe 
A targe was a light shield or buckler.  
 
Tasset 
A tasset was a piece of armour which hung from the corslet to offer 
protection to the thighs. 
 
Taurus PT99AF 
The Taurus PT99AF is a Brazilian made copy of the Bereta 92F. It is a 9mm 
parabellum calibre, semi-automatic pistol. It takes a 15-round magazine. 
The rear sight is adjustable and the front sight is a fixed blade. 
 
Theoben 
Theoben are an English manufacturer of air rifles.  
 
Theoben Rapid 7 
The Theoben Rapid 7 is a .22" calibre bolt action repeater air-rifle 
running on compressed air. It takes a seven-shot rotary magazine.  
 
Theoben Taunus 
The Theoben Taunus is a gas spring powered air-rifle. It is made in 
calibres of .177" .20" and .22", is 41 inches long and weighs around 
8lbs.  
 
Thermite 
Thermite is a mixture of aluminium and iron oxide or someother metal 
oxide which on combustion produces a very high temperature, around 3000 
degrees celsius. It is used as a filling for incendiary bombs. 
 
Thompson 
The thompson sub-machine gun is an American weapon developed from the 
1920s. It takes a .45" round from a 50-round drum or 20-round box. It has 
a cyclic rate of 800rpm and a muzzle velocity of 281 m/s. 
 
Tiger 1 
The tiger 1 was a German heavy breakthrough tank of the second world war. 
It was armed with an 88mm gun and heavy armour. 
 
Tomahawk 
The tomahawk is a type of hatchet used by North American indians. 
 
Torpedo 
A torpedo is a missile which swims through water to its target. They are 
used against ships and are carried by submarines, helicopters, aircraft 
and ships. 
 
Torpedoes 
see "torpedo" 
 
Tr-1 
The tr-1 is an American single-seat high-altitude tactical reconnaissance 
aircraft. 
 
Train-band 
A train-band was a company of citizen soldiers organised in London and 
elsewhere during the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries.  
 
Trebuchet 
The trebuchet was a Medieval military engine consisting of a pivoted 
lever with a sling at one end, and used for throwing heavy missiles. 
 
Trident 
A trident is a three headed spear, looking rather like an oversized fork. 
Trident is the nuclear missile deployed on certain American nuclear-
powered submarines. Each missile has eight warheads (MIRVs). The Trident 
replaced the earlier Polaris and Poseidon missiles.  
 
Trireme 
A trireme was an ancient warship with 3 rows of oars propelled by 170 
rowers. It was used by the Greeks, and copied by the Romans.  
 
Truncheon 
A truncheon is a short thick staff, or a club. They are usually carried 
by Policemen. 
 
Type 56 
The type 56 is a Chinese copy of the ak47. It is an automatic assault 
rifle taking a 7.62mm round from a 30-round box. The muzzle velocity is 
717 m/s and it is sighted to 800m. The cyclic rate is 600 rpm.  
 
Type 99 
The type 99 is a Japanese bolt operated rifle. It takes a 7.7Mm round 
from a 5-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 715 m/s and is sighted to 
2400m.  
 
U-47 
U-47 was a German submarine used during the Second World War. She was 
armed with 4 21 inch torpedo tubes in the bow and 1 21 inch torpedo tube 
in the stern. She had a top speed of 17 knots on the surface, and 8 knots 
submerged. She ecarried a dcrew of 44. 
 
Uhlan 
A uhlan was a light cavalry soldier armed with lance, pistol and sabre. 
They were employed as skirmishers and scouts. Marshal Saxe had a corps of 
them in the French Army.  
 
Uzi 
The Uzi is a modern Israeli machine pistol. It takes a 9mm round from a 
25/32/40-round box and has a cyclic rate of 600rpm. It has a muzzle 
velocity of 390 m/s.  
 
Valmet 
The valmet is a Finnish automatic assault rifle. It takes a 7.62mm round 
from a 30-round box. It has a muzzle velocity of 718 m/s and is sighted 
to 800m. It has a cyclic rate of 650 rpm.  
 
Vickers 3.7 AA gun 
The Vickers 3.7 inch AA gun was a British anti-aircraft gun of the Second 
World War. It fired 8 rounds-per-minute to an effective ceiling of 40000 
feet.  
 
Vtol 
Vtol is an abbreviation for vertical take off and landing. It is used 
with aircraft which can take-off and land with out a runway.  
 
VZ52 
The VZ52 is a Czechoslovakian rifle. It takes a 7.62mm round from a 10-
round box. The muzzle velocity is 740 m/s and it is sighted to 900m. It 
is gas operated. 
 
VZ61 
The VZ61 is a modern Czechoslovakian machine pistol. It takes a 7.62mm 
round from a 10/20-round box. It has a cyclic rate of 700rpm and a muzzle 
velocity of 294 m/s. 
 
W145 
The w145 is a stealth defense system semi-automatic pistol manufactured 
by the wilson company of America. 
 
Webley 
Webley are a British firearms manufacturer. The .455 service revolver was 
in use with the British army from 1887 to 1915. 
 
Webley No. 1 
The Webley No. 1 was a .455 inch calibre revolver manufactured by Webley 
& Scott from 1894 onwards. It was made in single and double-action models 
both of which had a 6-round cylinder.  
 
Webley-Bentley 
The Webley-Bentley was an English revolver of the 1850s.  
 
Xebec 
A xebec was a small three-masted Mediterranean warship. 
 
Yeoman 
The Yeoman of The Guard are bodyguards to the British sovereign. They 
were first appointed by Henry VII, and now act chiefly as warders at the 
Tower Of London. 
 
Yeomanry 
The yeomanry were a volunteer cavalry force in the Britsih army. They 
were originally formed in the 18th century for home defence and merged 
with the Territorial Force in 1907.  
 
Zk383 
The ZK383 is a Czechoslovakian sub-machine gun used during the second 
world war. It takes a 9mm round from a 30-round box. It has a cyclic rate 
of 500 and 700rpm and is sighted to 800m with a muzzle velocity of 365 
m/s. 
  
  
PLANTS AND ANIMALS  
  
 
Aardvark 
The aardvark is a south African ant eating animal.  
 
Aardwolf 
The aardwolf is a carnivorous mammal. 
 
Aaron's Rod 
Aaron's Rod is the only British species of Golden-rod. It is found in 
woods and thickets. 
 
Aasvogel 
The aasvogel are south African vultures.  
 
Abalone 
The abalone is an edible snail like marine animal.  
 
Abelmoschus 
Abelmoschus is a genus of tropical plants of the mallow family. It yields 
edible fruits, called okro (okra, ochro) which is used in soups.  
 
Abroma 
The Abroma is a genus of small trees which are native to India. 
 
Abutilon 
The Abutilon are a genus of plants of the order Malvaceae, also known as 
The Indian Mallows and American Jute.  
 
Acacia 
Acacia is a genus of plants of the order Leguminosae sub order Mimoseae 
consisting of trees or shrubs with compound pinnate leaves. They grow in 
Africa, Arabia, Australia and the East Indies. 
 
Acalepha 
Acalepha was a name once used to describe the Medusae (jelly-fishes). 
 
Acanthaceae 
The Acanthaceae are a natural order of dicotyledonous herbaceous plants 
or shrubs with opposite leaves and mono-petalous corolla. There are 
around 1400 species, mostly tropical. 
 
Acanthads 
see "Acanthaceae" 
 
Acanthus 
The acanthus is a herbaceous plant of south Europe, Asia and Africa. It 
has large hairy, shiny leaves.  
 
Acaridae 
Acaridae is the mite family of insects  
 
Acarina 
Acarina is the mite and tick order of the arachnida. They have a rounded 
body with no demarcation between the prosoma and the opisthosoma.  
 
Accentor 
An accentor is a type of bird of the prunelliadae family. 
 
Acephala 
The Acephala are the headless Mollusca with a bivalve shell.  
 
Acer 
Acer is a genus of plants of the order Aceraceae to which belongs the 
Maple.  
 
Achene 
In botany, an achene is a small, dry carpel containing a single seed, the 
pericarp of which is closely applied but seperable and which does not 
open when ripe. 
 
Achillaea 
The Achillaea are a milfoil genus of plants.  
 
Achimenes 
The Achimenes are a genus of tropical American plants with scaly 
underground tubers. They are of the order Gesneraceae. 
 
Acipenser 
The acipenser is a genus of cartilaginous ganoid fishes to which the 
sturgeon belongs.  
 
Aconite 
Aconite (Monkshood) is a genus of hardy herbaceous plants of the order 
Ranunculaceae. The are remarkable for their poisonous and medicinal 
properties. Aconite is found in temperate regions of Europe in woods and 
on shaded stream banks. 
 
Acorn 
The acorn is the fruit of the oak tree. 
 
Acorus 
Acorus is a genus of plants which includes the sweet-flag.  
 
Acotyledon 
see "Acotyledons" 
 
Acotyledons 
Acotyledons are plants not furnished with cotyledons or seed-lobes, such 
as ferns, mosses and sea-weeds.  
 
Acrita 
Acrita is another name for the animals called Protozoa. 
 
Acrogen 
Acrogen is a term used to describe ferns, mosses and lichens which grow 
by extension upwards. 
 
Actinia 
Actinia is a member of the order zoantharia.  
 
Actinopterygii 
Actinopterygii is a division of bony fishes. The paired fins have broad 
bases and lack fleshy lobes. External nares are double, internal nares 
are absent. Scales are of the ganoid type. 
 
Actinozoa 
Actinozoa are a class of animals belonging to the sub-kingdom 
Coelenterata. They have rayed tentacles around the mouth. 
 
Adda 
The adda is a species of lizard also called the skink.  
 
Addax 
The addax is a species of antelope found in North African deserts. It has 
wide-sweeping twisted horns about 4 feet long.  
 
Adder 
An adder is a venomous snake of the viper family found in England.  
 
Adder's-tongue 
Adder's-tongue is a species of British fern whose spores are produced on 
a spike which resembles a snake's tongue.  
 
Adder's-wort 
Adder's-wort is a plant supposed to be able to cure snake bites.  
 
Adder-pike 
The Adder-pike is a small species of the weever fish. Also called the 
Lesser Weever or Sting-fish.  
 
Adenanthera 
Adenanthera is a genus of trees and shrubs native to the East Indies and 
Ceylon of the order Leguminosae. 
 
Adiantum 
Adiantum is a genus of ferns. 
 
Adjutant-bird 
The adjutant-bird is a large wading bird of the stork family. It is 
native to the warmer parts of India where it is called Hurgila or Argala. 
 
Admiral 
Admiral is any of several species of butterfly in the same family 
(Nymphalidae) as the tortoiseshells. The red admiral Vanessa atalanta, 
wingspan 6 cm, is found worldwide in the northern hemisphere. It migrates 
south each year from northern areas to subtropical zones.  
 
Adonis 
Adonis (pheasant's eye) is a genus of ranunculaceous plants. They are 
found throughout Europe, Asia and America and are highly poisonous. 
 
Aegagrus 
The aegagrus are a wild species of ibex found in the Caucasus and other 
Asiatic mountains.  
 
Aegilops 
Aegilops is a genus of grasses closely allied to wheat. 
 
Aepyornis 
Aepyornis was a genus of gigantic birds once found in Madagascar. It had 
three toes and laid eggs 14 inches in length.  
 
Aesculus 
Aesculus is a genus of plants which includes the horse-chestnut.  
 
Afghan hound 
The Afghan hound is a breed of fast hunting dog resembling the saluki in 
build, though slightly smaller. It was first introduced to the West by 
British army officers serving on India's North-West Frontier along the 
Afghanistan border in the late 19th century. The Afghan hound hunts by 
sight. It is about 70 cm tall and has a long, silky coat that may be 
black, grey, or a wide range of beige or tawny colours.  
 
Agama 
Agama are several lizards allied to the iguana. 
 
Agaric 
The agaric is a family of fungus including the cultivated mushroom. 
 
Agave 
Agave is a genus of plants of the order Amaryllidaceae which includes the 
daffodil and narcissus. They are popularly known as American aloes. 
 
Ageratum 
Ageratum is a genus of composite plants found in the warmer parts of 
America. 
 
Agnatha 
The agnatha are a branch of the sub-phylum craniata group of animals. 
They are the lampreys and hagfishes. These are the most primitive of the 
craniates. The mouth is round and not bounded by jaws. The brain is 
primitive. 
 
Agnus Castus 
Agnus Castus is a shrub of the order Verbenaceae native to Mediterranean 
countries. It has white flowers and acrid aromatic fruits. It was thought 
to have the property of preserving chastity, hence the name Castus from 
the Latin chaste.  
 
Agouara 
The agouara is a crab-eating racoon of South America. 
 
Agouta 
The agouta is an insectivorous mammal peculiar to Haiti. It is of the 
tanrec family and somewhat larger than a rat. 
 
Agouti 
The agouti is a small rodent of the genus Dasyprocta, family 
Dasyproctidae. It is found in the forests of Central and South America. 
The agouti is herbivorous, swift-running, and about the size of a rabbit.  
 
Agrimony 
Agrimony is a genus of plants of the order Rosaceae consisting of slender 
perennial herbs found in temperate regions. The leaves of common agrimony 
are used as a yellow dye. 
 
Agrostis 
Agrostis is a genus of pasture grasses. 
 
Aigrette 
Aigrette is a term used to describe the feathery crown attached to the 
seeds of various plants such as the thistle and dandelion. 
 
Air-plants 
Air-plants (Epiphytes) are plants that live upon other plants or trees 
apparently without receiving any nutriment other than by the air. They 
are abundant in Java and tropical America.  
 
Airedale terrier 
The Airedale terrier breed of large terrier, about 60 cm tall, with a 
wiry red-brown coat and black saddle patch. It originated about 1850 in 
England, as a cross between the otterhound and Irish and Welsh terriers.  
 
Ajolote 
The ajolote is a Mexican reptile of the genus Bipes. It and several other 
tropical burrowing species are placed in the Amphisbaenia, a group 
separate from lizards and snakes among the Squamata. Unlike the others, 
however, which have no legs, it has a pair of short but well-developed 
front legs. In line with its burrowing habits, the skull is very solid, 
the eyes small, and external ears absent. The scales are arranged in 
rings, giving the body a worm-like appearance. 
 
Ajowan 
Ajowan is an umbelliferous plant which is cultivated in India, Persia and 
Egypt for the seeds which are used in cooking and medicine. 
 
Ajuga 
The ajuga are a genus of plants belonging to the labiate family.  
 
Alactaga 
The alactaga is a rodent mammal closely allied to the jerboa but larger. 
It is found across central Asia. 
 
Albacore 
The albacore is a species of fish.  
 
Albatross 
The albatross is a long winged oceanic bird.  
 
Albino 
An albino is an animal with no skin pigment and pink eyes.  
 
Alburnum 
The alburnum is the recently formed wood in trees.  
 
Alco 
The alco is a small variety of dog, with a small head and large pendulous 
ears found wild in Mexico and Peru. 
 
Alcyonaria 
Alcyonaria is an order of anthozoa. They have eight pinnate tentacles and 
eight mesenteries.  
 
Alcyonium 
Alcyonium is a member of the order of alcyonaria. 
 
Alder 
The alder is a genus of plants of the order Betulaceae, consisting of 
trees and shrubs found in the temperate and colder regions of the world.  
 
Alfa 
Alfa is a name for esparto grass obtained from Algeria. 
 
Alfalfa 
Alfalfa is a prolific forage plant similar to lucerne widely grown in the 
USA.  
 
Algarobilla 
Algarobilla are the seed-pods of trees of the Prosopis genus, valued for 
their tannin.  
 
Alimentary canal 
The alimentary canal is a tube beginning at the mouth and passing through 
the body to the anus. It is primarily used for the reception of food. 
 
Alkanet 
Alkanet is a perennial Boraginaceae found in warmer parts of Europe. It 
has a black taproot and funnel-shaped flowers which commence red and then 
turn blue.  
 
Allamanda 
Allamanda is a genus of American tropical plants of the order 
Apocynaceae, with large yellow or violet flowers. 
 
Alligator 
An alligator is a crocodilian reptile. It differs from the true crocodile 
by having a shorter and flatter head, much less webbed feet, and cavities 
in the upper jaw into which the long canine teeth of the lower jaw fit. 
 
Alligator-apple 
The alligator-apple is a narcotic fruit similar to the custard-apple. It 
is found in marshy areas of Jamaica. 
 
Alligator-pear 
Alligator-pear is an old name for the Avocado-pear (Avocado). 
 
Allium 
Allium is a genus of plants of the order Liliaceae which are 
distinguished by a peculiar pungent smell and taste characterised as 
alliaceous. These include the onion, garlic, leek and shalot. 
 
Allosaurus 
Allosaurus was the biggest and fiercest carnivorous dinosaur of the 
jurassic period. It was 15m tall and weighed about 3 tons.  
 
Aloe 
Aloe is a genus of plants of the order Liliaceae. They are natives of 
Africa and other hot regions. The leaves are fleshy, thick and spinous at 
the edges. The flowers have a tubular corolla.  
 
Alopecurus 
Alopecurus is a genus of grasses. 
 
Alpaca 
The alpaca is a close relative of the llama and a native of South 
America. It is smaller than the llama and has a fleece of around 24 
inches long from which cloth is woven.  
 
Alpine Crow 
The Alpine Crow or Alpine Chough is a European bird closely akin to the 
chough of England.  
 
Alpine Warbler 
The alpine warbler is a European bird of the same family as the hedge-
sparrow.  
 
Alsatian 
Alsatian is another name for the German shepherd dog. 
 
Alstroemeria 
Alstroemeria are a genus of South American plants of the order 
Amaryllideae.  
 
Alveoli 
The alveoli are air-sacs within the lung at the end of bronchioles. 
 
Alyssum 
Alyssum is a genus of cruciferous plants including the madwort. 
 
Amadavat 
The amadavat is a small Indian singing bird allied to the finches.  
 
Amadou 
Amadou is the name of several fungi of the genus Polyporus, they have a 
leathery appearance and grow on trees.  
 
Amanita 
Amanita is a genus of fungi including fly-agaric. 
 
Amaranthaceae 
The Amaranthaceae (amaranths) are an order of apetalous plants mainly 
found in tropical countries. They are remarkable for the white or reddish 
scales of which their flowers are composed. 
 
Amaranths 
see "Amaranthaceae" 
 
Amaryllidaceae 
Amaryllidaceae is an order of monocotyledonous plants which are generally 
bulbous with a highly coloured flower, six stamens and an inferior three-
celled ovary. They are native to Europe and most other warm parts of the 
world.  
 
Ambatch 
Ambatch is a thorny leguminous shrub with yellow flowers growing in the 
shallows of the Upper Nile and other rivers of tropical Africa. It grows 
to around 15 to 20 feet tall. The wood is very light and spongy and is 
used to make rafts. 
 
Amblyopsis 
Amblyopsis is a genus of blind fishes comprised of a single species found 
in the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky.  
 
Amelanchier 
Amelanchier is a genus of small trees native to Europe and North America. 
 
Amentaceae 
Amentaceae is the family of trees and plants where the flowers are 
arranged in the form of catkins. 
 
Amentum 
Amentum is a botanical term for the catkin. 
 
Ametabola 
Ametabola are a division of insects which are wingless and do not undergo 
any metamorphosis, but which hatch from the egg nearly in the same form 
they keep throughout their life. This includes the lice and spring-tails. 
 
Ammonite 
An ammonite is one type of extinct sea creature, often found as a fossil. 
 
Amoeba 
An amoeba is a primitive one cell animal. 
 
Amoebina 
The amoebina is an order of rhizopoda. The order is comprised of the 
amoeba and its relatives. Reproduction is usually by binary fission. 
 
Amoeboid 
see "amoebina" 
 
Amomum 
Amomum are a genus of plants of the order Zingiberaceae which includes 
ginger. They are native to warm climates and are remarkable for the 
pungency and aromatic properties of their seeds. 
 
Amphibia 
Amphibia is a class of craniates which during their evolution have only 
partialy adapted to life on land. They breed in water.  
 
Amphibian 
see "amphibia" 
 
Amphibians 
see "amphibia" 
 
Amphineura 
The amphineura is a class of phylum mollusca. The body is bilaterally 
symmetrical. The mouth and anus are at opposite ends of the body. The 
foot is flattened and the mantle bears calcareous plates. 
 
Amphipoda 
Amphipoda is an order of malacostraca where the carapace is absent and 
the body is laterally compressed. The abdomen is elongated.  
 
Anaconda 
The anaconda is a South American snake, a member of the python and boa 
family, the Boidae. One of the largest snakes, growing to 9m more, it is 
found in and near water, where it lies in wait for the birds and animals 
on which it feeds. The anaconda is not venomous, but kills its prey by 
coiling round it and squeezing until the creature suffocates. The 
anaconda is a climber as well as a swimmer, and may be found in trees 
along river banks.  
 
Anagallis 
see "Pimpernel" 
 
Anapsida 
The anapsida are a subclass of reptiles in which there are no temporal 
vacuities. 
 
Anatomy 
Anatomy is the study of animal's structure. 
 
Anchovy 
The anchovy is a small fish (Engraulis encrasicholus) of the herring 
family. It is fished extensively, being abundant in the Mediterranean, 
and is also found on the Atlantic coast of Europe and in the Black Sea. 
It grows to 20 cm. Pungently flavoured, it is processed into fish pastes 
and essences, and used as a garnish, rather than eaten fresh.  
 
Ancylostoma 
Ancylostoma is a phylum nematoda. 
 
Anemone 
The anemone is any plant of the genus Anemone, of the buttercup family 
Ranunculaceae. The function of petals is performed by its sepals. The 
white or lavender-tinged wood anemone (Anemone quinquefolia) grows in 
open woods, flowering in spring. 
 
Angelfish 
Angelfish is any of a number of unrelated fishes. The freshwater 
angelfish, genus Pterophyllum, of South America, is a tall, side-to-side 
flattened fish with a striped body, up to 26 cm long, but usually smaller 
in captivity. The angelfish or monkfish of the genus Squatina is a 
bottom-living shark up to 1.8m long with a body flattened from top to 
bottom. The marine angelfishes, Pomacanthus and others, are long narrow-
bodied fish with spiny fins, often brilliantly coloured, up to 60cm long, 
living around coral reefs in the tropics.  
 
Angler 
Angler is any of an order of fishes Lophiiformes, with flattened body and 
broad head and jaws. Many species have small, plant-like tufts on their 
skin. These act as camouflage for the fish as it waits, either floating 
among seaweed or lying on the sea bottom, twitching the enlarged tip of 
the threadlike first ray of its dorsal fin to entice prey. There are over 
200 species of angler fish, living in both deep and shallow water in 
temperate and tropical seas. The males of some species have become so 
small that they live as parasites on the females.  
 
Animal 
An animal is a living creature endowed with voluntary movement. 
 
Animals 
see "animal" 
 
Annelid 
Annelid is any segmented worm of the phylum Annelida. Annelids include 
earthworms, leeches, and marine worms such as lugworms. They have a 
distinct head and soft body, which is divided into a number of similar 
segments shut off from one another internally by membranous partitions, 
but there are no jointed appendages.  
 
Annelids 
see "phylum_annelida" 
 
Ant 
An ant is a small hymenopterous insect. Ants have a complex social 
structure, and instincts.  
 
Anteater 
The anteater is a mammal of the family Myrmecophagidae, order Edentata, 
native to Mexico, Central America, and tropical South America. An 
anteater lives almost entirely on ants and termites. It has toothless 
jaws, an extensile tongue, and claws for breaking into the nests of its 
prey. Species include the giant anteater Myrmecophaga tridactyla, about 
1.8m long including the tail, the tamandua or collared anteater Tamandua 
tetradactyla, about 90cm long, and the silky anteater Cyclopes didactyla, 
about 35cm long. The name is also incorrectly applied to the aardvark, 
the echidna, and the pangolin.  
 
Antedon 
The antedon is a type of crinoidea. 
 
Antelope 
An antelope is any of several cloven hoofed ruminates.  
 
Antelopes 
see "antelope" 
 
Anthozoa 
The anthozoa is the class of marine animals known as sea anemones, sea 
fans, sea pens and stony corals. They are solitary or colonial animals in 
which only hydroid individuals are represented.  
 
Anthropoidea 
The anthropoidea are an order of eutheria. They have the most highly 
developed  
Brain of the mammals. The digits bear nails.  
 
Ants 
see "ant" 
 
Anura 
Anura is a subclass of amphibia. They are the frogs and toads. These are 
amphibians which lose their tail at the metamorphosis. In the adult the 
gill slits close. The hind limbs are very powerful and have webs between 
the digits. 
 
Anus 
The anus is the opening at the end of the alimentary canal. 
 
Apatosaurus 
Apatosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur from the jurassic period. It was 20m 
long and weighed 30 tonnes. It digested food with the aid of stones in 
the stomach. 
 
Ape 
see "apes" 
 
Apes 
Apes are a group of primates closely related to humans. 
 
Aphetohyoidea 
Aphetohyoidea is a subclass of fish. They have a bony endoskeleton and 
primitive jaws.  
 
Apoda 
The apoda are a subclass of amphibia. They are limbless, burrowing 
animals with a sub-terminal anus and small practically useless eyes 
covered by opaque skin.  
 
Apple 
An apple is the edible fruit of the trees of genus malus, rosaceae 
family.  
 
Apricot 
The apricot is a fruit tree native to Asia. It was first brought to 
England in 1652.  
 
Apterygota 
Apterygota is a subclass of insecta.  
 
Arachnida 
Arachnida is a class of arthropods. They are the spiders, scorpions, 
king-crabs and mites. The body is divided into an anterior prosoma and a 
posterior mesosoma. There are four pairs of walking legs on the mesosoma. 
 
Araneida 
Araneida is the spider order of arachnida. Spinnerets are present in the 
abdomen for spinning the web.  
 
Archaeopteryx 
Archaeopteryx was the first bird. It appeared on earth during the 
jurassic period. It was about 35cm long and unlike modern birds had 
teeth.  
 
Archiannelida 
The archiannelida are a class of phylum annelida. 
 
Arenicola 
The arenicola are polychaeta. 
 
Argala 
see "Adjutant-bird" 
 
Argali 
The argali is a wild sheep found in Siberia.  
 
Argus-flounder 
The argus-flounder is a species of flounder found in American seas. 
 
Armadillo 
The armadillo is a mammal native to South and Central America.  
 
Arrow worm 
see "phylum_chaetognatha" 
 
Arthropod 
see "phylum_arthropoda" 
 
Arthropods 
see "arthropod" 
 
Artiodactyla 
Artiodactyla is an order of eutheria. They are even toed ungulates: 
cattle and sheep.; pigs, deer and camels. They are specialised to deal 
with large quantities of vegetable food. The cheek teeth are adapted for 
grinding. The stomach is complex. 
 
Ascaris 
Ascaris is a phylum nematoda. 
 
Asexual 
Asexual is a term applied to reproduction by a single parent. 
 
Ash 
The ash is a type of tree yielding strong elastic timber. 
 
Asp 
The asp is a type of poisonous snake. 
 
Aspen 
The aspen is a tree native to Europe, north Africa and north Asia.  
 
Ass 
The ass is an animal related to the horse and zebra.  
 
Asterias 
Asterias is an asteroidea.  
 
Asteroidea 
Asteroidea is a subclass of stelleroidea. These are the starfishes. Tube 
feet are in a groove along the under surface of each of the "arms". The 
feet can be retracted. 
 
Aubergine 
see "Egg-plant" 
 
Auricle 
An auricle is a heart chamber which receives blood. 
 
Aves 
The aves are the bird class of craniates. They are similar to the 
reptiles, but have become adapted to flying. The fore limbs are modified 
to form wings. 
 
Avocado 
The avocado-pear (avocado) is an evergreen tree of the order Lauraceae. 
It has a fruit similar to a pear, weighing around 1 to 2 pounds. It is a 
native tree of tropical America and the West Indies. 
 
Babiroussa 
The babiroussa is a ferocious wild pig found in Sulawesi. 
 
Baboon 
The baboon is a medium sized monkey of the genus papio. They are 
characterized by a dog like snout, cheek prominences, and coloured bare 
patches on the buttocks. Baboons are found in Africa and Arabia. 
 
Baboons 
see "baboon" 
 
Bacteria 
Bacteria are micro organisms. 
 
Badger 
The badger is a carnivorous mammal found in England.  
 
Balantidium 
Balantidium is a member of the order of heterotricha. 
 
Balm 
Balm is a plant native to Europe and western Asia.  
 
Balsam 
Balsam is a genus of herbs. 
 
Bamboo 
Bamboo is a genus of grasses found in warm climates.  
 
Banana 
The banana is a perennial herb. Cultivated in tropical and sub tropical 
climates. 
 
Bandicoot 
The bandicoot is a small marsupial peculiar to australasia. 
 
Bantam 
Bantams are miniature fowls.  
 
Banyan 
The banyan is a large fig tree native to India. 
 
Barbel 
The barbel is a type of fresh water fish related to the carp. 
 
Bark 
Bark is the external coating of tree trunks.  
 
Barley 
Barley is the name of several cereal plants of the genus Hordeum, order 
Gramineae, which yield a grain used in food and for making malt. Barley 
has been known by man since ancient times and was used by the Egyptians 
to brew beer. 
 
Barnacle 
Barnacles are crustaceans often attaching themselves to ships.  
 
Barramunda 
see "Ceratodus" 
 
Basil 
Basil is an aromatic herb.  
 
Bass 
The bass is a fish of the perch family. 
 
Basset hound 
The basset hound is a long bodied, short crooked legged dog.  
 
Bat 
A bat is a nocturnal creature of the order cheiroptera. 
 
Bay tree 
The bay tree is a small evergreen tree. Its leaves are used in cooking. 
 
Beagle 
The beagle is a small dog of the fox hound type.  
 
Bean 
A bean is the seed of a plant of the order leguminosae. 
 
Bear 
A bear is an omnivorous mammal animal of the order ursus. 
 
Beaver 
The beaver is a large amphibian rodent. 
 
Bebeeru 
see "Greenheart" 
 
Bee 
The bee is a four winged stinging insect of the order hymenoptera.  
 
Beech 
The beech is a forest amentaceae. 
 
Beef 
Beef is the meat derived from the carcass of bulls and cows.  
 
Beetle 
The beetle is an insect of the order coleoptera.  
 
Begonia 
Begonias are succulent herbs native to tropical climates. 
 
Behaviour 
Behaviour is an organism's mode of life.  
 
Belladonna 
Belladonna is a poisonous plant from which atropine is derived. 
 
Beluga 
The beluga is a large dolphin.  
 
Bergamot 
The bergamot is a tree of the genus citrus. The rind of its fruit 
provides a fragrant orange scented essence used in perfume. 
 
Bhang 
Bhang is the Indian name for cannabis indica. 
 
Biennial 
Biennial refers to plants that live for two years/seasons.  
 
Bighorn 
The bighorn (Ovis cervina) is a large sheep with massive horns. It is 
found in the Rocky Mountains from Alaska to Mexico. Also called the Rocky 
Mountain Sheep. 
 
Bilberry 
The bilberry is a small shrub of the order ericaceae. 
 
Bilharzia 
Bilharzia is a parasitic worm of the fluke group. 
 
Bindweed 
Bindweed is a perennial herb of the order convolvulaceae. 
 
Biology 
Biology is the science of life and living things. 
 
Birch 
The birch is a slender tree.  
 
Birchirs 
The birchirs are members of the palaeonisciformes order.  
 
Bird 
see "aves" 
 
Bird of prey 
A bird of prey is a bird with a hooked beak and sharp claws which hunts 
other animals.  
 
Birds 
see "bird" 
 
Bishopweed 
Bishopweed is a perennial herb used to treat gout.  
 
Bison 
The bison is a division of the ox family. 
 
Bittern 
The bittern is a British marsh bird related to the heron. 
 
Black snake 
The black snake (coluber constrictor) is a common non-venomous snake 
found in the USA. It is about 5 feet long and is so agile it was 
nicknamed the Racer. It feeds on small animals and birds and was used for 
catching rats.  
 
Black-bass 
see "Growler" 
 
Blackbird 
The blackbird (Turdus merula) is a British bird of the thrush family. The 
male has black plumage and a yellow bill. The female is dark brown with a 
dark bill.  
 
Blackbuck 
The blackbuck (Antilope cervicapra) is an antelope found in central and 
north west India. It has spirally twisted horns and stands about 3 feet 
tall. 
 
Blackcap 
The blackcap is an English song bird of the warbler family. 
 
Bladder-nut 
The bladder-nut is a name of shrubs or small trees of the genus 
Staphylea, order Sapindaceae. They are native to Europe, Asia and North 
America.  
 
Bladder-wrack 
Bladder-wrack is a sea-weed so called because of the floating vesicles in 
its fronds. It is common on English beachs. 
 
Bladderwort 
The bladderwort is a genus of herbs of the order lentibulariaceae.  
 
Blattidae 
The blattidae are a family of insects of the order Orthoptera. They are 
voracious, some species eating everything which gets in their way. The 
cockroach (Blatta orientalis) is a member of this family.  
 
Bleak 
The bleak is a small river fish, 6 or 7 inches long. It is a member of 
the Carp family and resembles the dace. It is found in England and 
Europe. It is generally silver but with a green back and is very edible.  
 
Blenheim 
The Blenheim is a variety of spaniel bearing a close resemblance to the 
King Charles breed, but is somewhat smaller.  
 
Blenny 
The Blenny is a genus of acanthopterygious fishes (Blennius) 
distinguished by a short rounded head and a long compressed smooth body. 
Owing to their small gill openings they can exist for for some time 
without water. They are found in sea water. Some species are found off 
the coast of Britain.  
 
Blesbok 
The blesbok (Alcelaphus albifrons) is (was?) an antelope found in South 
Africa. It has a white marked face, a general chocolate colouring and a 
"saddle" of a bluish colour. It was heavily hunted during the 19th 
century. 
 
Blind fish 
The Blind fish are several species of fishes of the family Amblyopsidae 
inhabiting the American cave-streams. 
 
Blindworm 
The blindworm is a legless lizard of the anguidae family. 
 
Bloodhound 
The bloodhound is an ancient breed of dog black and tan in colour and 
with pendulous ears. It has great powers of scent and is often used for 
tracking. 
 
Blue bottle 
The blue bottle (Musca vomitoria) is a large blue species of the the 
blow-fly.  
 
Blue-fish 
The blue-fish (Temnodon) is a sea fish common off the Altantic coast of 
the USA. It is similar to the mackerel, but grows to 3 feet long. Also 
called the skip-jack, horse-mackerel and green-fish. 
 
Blue-throat 
The blue-throat (Sylvia succica) is a bird with a tawny breast marked 
with a sky-blue crescent. It is found in northern Europe and Asia. It is 
eaten in France. 
 
Blue-wing 
The blue-wing is a genus of American ducks so called because of the 
colour of the wing coverts. 
 
Bluethroat 
The bluethroat is a small bird. 
 
Bo tree 
The bo tree is an Indian fig tree held sacred to buddha.  
 
Boa 
The boa is a genus of serpents of the family Boidae. They are 
distinguished by having jaws which can dilate to enable them to swallow 
prey thicker than themselves. They also have a hook on each side of the 
vent. 
 
Boar 
Boar is a male, not castrated pig (swine).  
 
Boat-fly 
The boat-fly (Notonecta glauca) is an aquatic hemipterous insect which 
swims on its back. 
 
Boatbill 
The boatbill is a heron type bird found in brazil.  
 
Bogue 
The bogue is an acanthopterygian fish found in the Mediterranean. It has 
large eyes and a brilliant colouring.  
 
Boidae 
The boidae are a family of large non-venomous serpants with two mobile 
hooks and the rudiments of hind-legs near the anus.  
 
Boletus 
Boletus is a genus of fungi, order Hymenomycetes, family Polyporei. They 
have a broad hemispherical cap the lower surface formed of open tupes, 
cylindrical in form, and adhering to one another. The tubes can be 
separated from the cap and contain little cylindrical capsules which are 
the organs of reproduction. 
 
Bombay duck 
The bombay duck is a small fish of the Indian and China seas. 
 
Bontebok 
The bontebok is a pied antelope of South Africa allied to the blesbok.  
 
Borage 
Borage is a biennial herb of the order boraginaceae.  
 
Botany 
Botany is the science of plant life.  
 
Botany-Bay Oak 
see "Casuarina" 
 
Box 
Box is a hardy shrub of the order euphorbiaceae.  
 
Box elder 
Box elder is the ash-leaved maple tree which is found in the USA. It was 
once used as a source of sugar.  
 
Box thorn 
Box thorn is a climbing solanaceae. 
 
Boxer 
The boxer is a medium-sized dog of continental origin. It has a smooth 
coat.  
 
Brachiosaurus 
Brachiosaurus was one of the largest animals ever to live. It was a 
dinosaur from the jurassic period. It was 25m long and weighed 50 tonnes. 
It was a herbivore. 
 
Bracken 
Bracken is a fern growing on heathland. 
 
Bradyodonti 
The bradyodonti is an order of chondrichthyes. They are the chimaeras. A 
palato-quadrate bar is fused to the cranium. Teeth are few and crushing. 
 
Bramble 
The bramble is a prickly shrub of the order rosaceae. 
 
Branchiopoda 
Branchiopoda is a subclass of crustacean in which the trunk appendages 
are broad, lobed and fringed with hairs. 
 
Bread-fruit 
Bread-fruit is a tree of the order Artocarpaceae. The tree grows to a 
height of about 100 feet. The leaves are leathery, about 1 foot long and 
3 or 4 inches wide. The fruit of the tree when roasted tastes somewhat 
like bread, hence the name! The sap of the tree is similar in appearance 
to cows milk, and is considered nutritious, hence the alternative name of 
cow-tree.  
 
Bream 
The bream is a fresh water fish allied to the carp. 
 
Brill 
The brill is a type of fish like the turbot.  
 
Briza 
Briza is a genus of grass. It is popularly called quaking grass on 
account of the spikelets being in a constant state of tremulous motion.  
 
Broccoli 
Broccoli is a late variety of the cauliflower, hardier and with more 
colour in the flower and leaves. The flower-stalks are eaten.  
 
Bromeliaceae 
Bromeliaceae is the pineapple family of endogenous plants. The name comes 
from the genus Bromelia to which the pineapple was once incorrectly 
refered.  
 
Bronchiole 
A bronchiole is a branch of a bronchus within the lung. 
 
Bronchioles 
see "bronchiole" 
 
Bronchus 
The bronchus is a pipe connecting the trachea to the lung.  
 
Bronze-wing 
The Bronze-wing is various species of Australian pigeons distinguished by 
the bronze colour of their plumage. 
 
Broom 
Broom is a shrub of the order leguminosae.  
 
Broom-grass 
Broom-grass (Broom-corn) is a plant of the order of grasses, with a 
jointed stem. It grows to a height of between 8 and 10 feet. It was 
cultivated in North America and used to make carpet-brooms. 
 
Bryozoa 
Bryozoa is another name for phylum polyzoa. 
 
Buansuah 
The buansuah is a wild dog of Northen India.  
 
Bubaline Antelope 
The bubaline antelope is an ox-like antelope found in the deserts of 
north Africa. It is yellow-brown in colour and has horns which start 
forward and outward, and then trun backwards. 
 
Bubalus 
The bubalus is the genus of animals which includes the buffalo. 
 
Bubo 
Bubo is a genus of owls, including the great-horned owl.  
 
Buccal cavity 
The buccal cavity is the region into which the mouth opens. The tongue is 
found on the floor of the buccal cavity.  
 
Bucerotidoe 
see "Hornbills" 
 
Buck 
Buck is the name of the male fallow-deer, reindeer, chamois, goat, hare 
and rabbit. 
 
Buck-bean 
The buck-bean (bog-bean, Marsh-Trefoil) is a plant of the order 
Gentianaceae. It is common in boggy soils and is found in England, Europe 
and North America. It is a bitter tasting plant and was once used as a 
tonic. 
 
Buck-hound 
The buck-hound is a type of dog similar to the stag-hound but smaller, 
originally bred for hunting bucks. 
 
Buckthorn 
The buckthorn is a shrub of the order rhamnaceae. 
 
Bucku 
Bucku are several plants of the genus Barosma order Rutacea. They were 
used as medicine for urino-genital disorders around the turn of the 
century. 
 
Buffalo 
The buffalo is a large animal of the ox family. 
 
Bugula 
Bugula is an ectoprocta.  
 
Bulb 
A bulb is a modified leaf-bud formed on a plant on or beneath the surface 
of the ground, emitting roots from its base and a stem from its centre. 
 
Bull 
A bull is a male animal of the bovidea family.  
 
Bull-frog 
The bull-frog is a large species of frog found in North America. They are 
between 8 and 10 inches long, and get their name from their croak which 
resembles the lowing of cattle  
 
Bullace 
The bullace (prunus insititia) is a wild plum.  
 
Bulldog 
The bulldog is an ancient breed of British dog. It was bred for bull 
baiting and as such it can grip a bull's throat without obstructing its 
nostrils. It has a distinctive short, thick, kinked tail.  
 
Bullfinch 
The bullfinch (Pyrrhula pyrrhula) is a species of finch of the family 
Fringillidae. 
 
Bulrush 
The bulrush is a perennial sedge of the order cyperaceae. 
 
Bunting 
The bunting is a bird of the sub-family Emberizinae, allied to the 
finches. 
 
Burdock 
Burdock is a biennial herb of the order compositae. 
 
Burnet 
Burnet is a perennial rosaceous herb. 
 
Bush antelope 
The bush antelope is a small African antelope.  
 
Buttercup 
The buttercup is a perennial herb of the order ranunculaceae. 
 
Butterfish 
see "Gunnel" 
 
Butterfly 
Butterfly is a division of the order of lepidoptera. The other is moth. 
 
Butterwort 
The butterwort is a perennial herb of the order lentibulariaceae. 
 
Buzzard 
The buzzard is a group of 20 types of birds of prey.  
 
Cabbage 
Cabbage is a hardy biennial vegetable of the genus Brassica, order 
cruciferae.  
 
Cactus 
Cactus is the order of fleshy, thickened and mainly leafless plants.  
 
Calamus 
Calamus (Sweet Flag) is a perennial herb native to India and southern 
Asia. It has narrow sword-shaped leaves and a thick branched rhizome. 
When crushed the leaves emit an odour of tangerine. 
 
Calcarea 
Calcarea are a class of sponges with a spicular skeleton made of calcium 
carbonate. 
 
Calyptoblastea 
The calyptoblastea is an order of hydrozoa. They are marine colonial 
forms in which the perisac is extended to form hydrothecae around the 
hydranths and gonothecae around the blastostyles.  
 
Camel 
The camel is a group of even toed, ungulate ruminating mammals. 
 
Camomile 
Camomile is a perennial dwarf herb of the order compositae. 
 
Camptosaurus 
Camptosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur from the jurassic period. It mainly 
stayed on all-fours, but could rear up on its hind legs to run away from 
predators. It had hooves instead of claws on its fingers.  
 
Canary 
The canary is a bird of the finch family and native of the Canary 
islands.  
 
Cannabis 
Cannabis is a plant of the order urticaceae. The dried flowers were once 
used as a medicine in migraine and neuralgia.  
 
Capromys 
see "Hog-rat" 
 
Carapace 
A carapace is a dorsal shield.  
 
Caraway 
Caraway is a biennial herb umbelliferae.  
 
Cardamom 
Cardamom is an aromatic perennial herb of the order scitamineae.  
 
Cariama 
The cariama is a large, long legged bird found in south America.  
 
Caribou 
The caribou is a north American reindeer. 
 
Carinatae 
The carinatae are an order of birds. They can fly.  
 
Carmarina 
Carmarina is a member of the order trachylina.a 
 
Carnation 
The carnation is a hardy perennial plant of the order caryophyllaceae.  
 
Carnauba 
Carnauba is a native palm of Brazil. When young the leaves are covered in 
a wax used to make candles. 
 
Carnivora 
Carnivora is the carnivorous order of eutheria. They primarily eat the 
flesh of other craniates. Canines are prominent. The caecum is small or 
absent.  
 
Carnivore 
A carnivore is a carnivorous mammal.  
 
Carnivorous 
Something which is carnivorous eats flesh.  
 
Carob 
The carob is a leguminous evergreen tree found in mediterranean 
countries.  
 
Carp 
The carp is a family fresh water fish.  
 
Carrageen 
Carrageen is a common British seaweed (Chondrus crispus). When dried and 
boiled it yields a jelly used in food and medicine.  
 
Carrot 
The carrot is a vegetable umbelliferae. 
 
Caruncle 
A caruncle is the fleshy excresence on the head of a fowl, such the comb 
of a cock or the wattles of a turkey.  
 
Carya 
Carya is the hickory genus of plants. 
 
Caryophyllaceae 
Caryophyllaceae are an order of plants. They have opposite undivided 
leaves without stipples. The order includes the Carnation, chick-weed and 
sweet-william. 
 
Caryophyllia 
Caryophyllia is a member of the order zoantharia. 
 
Caryopsis 
Caryopsis is the botanical term for small one-seeded, dry, indehiscent 
fruit in which the seed adheres to the thin pericap throughout, such as 
in wheat and other grains. 
 
Caryota 
Caryota is a genus of palms with doubly pinnate leaves. 
 
Cashew 
The cashew is a nut from a small evergreen tree found in the caribbean. 
 
Cassava 
Cassava is a South American shrub of the order Euphorbiaceae. It grows to 
about 8 feet in height and has broad, shiny leaves roughly in the shape 
of a human hand and attractive white and pink flowers.  The root is used 
in cooking.  
 
Cassia 
Cassia is a large genus of leguminous plants found in tropical countries. 
The species consists of trees, shrubs and herbs. The leaves are abruptly 
pinnated and usually bear glands on their stalks. The drug senna is 
obtained from the leaflets of many of the species. 
 
Cassicus 
The Cassicus is a genus of American insessorial birds, the Cassicans 
(American Orioles). They are allied to the Starlings and are remarkable 
for the ingenuity with which they weave their nests. 
 
Cassowary 
The cassowary are a genus of ruminating birds similar to the ostrich. 
 
Cassowary Tree 
see "Casuarina" 
 
Castoridae 
The Castoridae is a family of rodent animals comprising the beaver and 
others.  
 
Casuaridae 
The Casuaridae are a family of the order Casuariformes. These are the 
cassowaries. They have strong legs and a bald head topped with a helmet.  
 
Casuariformes 
The Casuariformes is an order of birds. 
 
Casuarina 
The Casuarina (Botany-Bay Oak), is the only genus of the order 
Casuarinaceae (cassowary trees). There are around 30 species mainly 
native to Australia. They are jointed, leafless trees similar to the 
Birches.  
 
Cat 
The cat is a genus of carnivorous animal. 
 
Cat-bird 
The Cat-bird is a species of the American thrush. It is about 9 inches 
long. The plummage is dark gray on the top and paler grey underneath.  
 
Cat-fish 
The Cat-fish is a voracious fish of the gobies family. It was also called 
the Wolf-fish in the 19th century.  
 
Catalpa 
The Catalpa is a genus of plants of the order Bignoniaceae. They are 
trees with simple leaves and large, gay, trumpet shaped flowers. 
 
Catamount 
Catamount is an old name for any wild cat, including the Lynx and the 
Puma. 
 
Catamountain 
Catamountain is an old variation of Catamount.  
 
Catarrhina 
Catarrhina is a suborder of anthropoidea. The nostrils face downwards. 
The internasal septum is narrow. The tail is never prehensile. 
 
Catchfly 
Catchfly is a popular name for several plants of the genus Silene.  
 
Catha 
Catha is a genus of plants of the order Celastraceae, mostly native to 
Africa. The leaves and twigs of one species are used to make khat, a 
drink similar to coffee.  
 
Catmint 
Catmint (catnip) is a plant of the order Labiatae. It grows to a height 
of around 3 feet and has pink tinged white flowers and stalked, downy, 
heart-shaped leaves. It is so named for the fascination cats have with 
it. 
 
Catnip 
see "Catmint" 
 
Cattle 
The term cattle applies to all members of the ox genus. 
 
Caudex 
In botany, caudex refers to the scaly trunk of palms and tree-ferns.  
 
Cauliflower 
The cauliflower is a vegetable of the order cruciferae. 
Reptilia is the reptile class of craniates. They are animals completely 
adapted to life on dry land. The skin is dry and bears horny epidermal 
scales. The lungs form the sole respiratory organs. Eggs are laid on dry 
land. 
 
Cavy 
The cavy are small rodents found in south America.  
 
Cecidomyia 
Cecidomyia is the genus of insects to which the Hessian-fly belongs.  
 
Cedar 
The cedar is an ornamental evergreen tree native of Africa and India. 
 
Cedar-bird 
Cedar-bird is a name given to the American wax-wing on account of its 
fondness for the berries of the red cedar.  
 
Cedrela 
Cedrela is a genus of large timber trees. 
 
Celandine 
Celandine is the name of two british flowers. Greater celandine belongs 
to the poppy family. Lesser Celandine (swallow-wort, pilewort) was 
thought to be a cure for piles.  
 
Celeriac 
Celeriac is a variety of celery in which the root resembles a turnip. It 
is used in cooking.  
 
Celery 
Celery is a biennial vegetable of the order umbellifereae.  
 
Cembra Pine 
The Cembra Pine (Swiss stone pine, Siberian pine) is a conifer found in 
Central Europe. It has edible seeds and yields a turpentine called 
Carpathian balsam. 
 
Centaurea 
Centaurea is a genus of composite plants. They are all annual or 
perennial herbs with alternate leaves and single heads, the florets of 
which are tubular. The genus includes corn blue-bottle, purple sultan, 
white sultan and knapweed. 
 
Centaury 
Centaury is an annual herb of the gentian family. It has pretty red 
flowers and was extolled for its medicinal properties by herbailists in 
the past. 
 
Cephalochordata 
The cephalochordata is a class of sub-phylum acrania. They are the 
lancets. Small fish-like animals. The notochord extends the whole length 
of the body, even to the tip of the snout.  
 
Cephalopoda 
Cephalopoda is a class of phylum mollusca. They are the squids and 
octopuses. The head is well developed and surrounded by prehensile 
tentacles. The eyes are large and complex.  
 
Cephaloptera 
Cephaloptera are a genus of cartilaginous fishes of the ray family. They 
have a pair of small fins which stand out from the head like horns, hence 
they are called the fin-headed rays or horned rays.  
 
Ceramiaceae 
Ceramiaceae is an order of cellular sea-weeds consisting of thread-like 
jointed plants of a red or brown-red colour.  
 
Cerastes 
Cerastes is a genus of deadly African vipers. They have two small horns 
formed by the scales above the eyes, hence they are called Horned Vipers. 
 
Cerasus 
Cerasus is the cherry genus of trees. 
 
Ceratodus 
Ceratodus (barramunda) is a genus of fishes belonging to the Dipnoi order 
(lung-fishes). They are between 3 and 6 feet long and are found in 
Australian rivers. 
 
Cereal 
Cereal is a term applied to Gramineae cultivated for food (wheat, barley, 
rye, oats &c.). The name comes from Ceres, the goddess associated with 
corn.  
 
Ceroxylon 
Ceroxylon (wax-palm) is a genus of South American palms.  
 
Cervidae 
Cervidae is the deer family of animals which includes the Cervus genus. 
 
Cervus 
Cervus is the deer genus of animals.  
 
Cestoda 
Cestoda is a class of phylum platyhelminthes commonly known as the 
tapeworms. They are internal parasites lacking an alimentary canal. They 
have no definite sense organs, and the nervous system is poorly 
developed. The cuticle is thick and many-layered. Hooks and/or suckers 
are limited to one end. They have great reproductive powers, both sexual 
and asexual.  
 
Cestracion 
Cestracion is a genus of cartilaginous fish allied to the sharks. 
 
Cetacea 
Cetacea is an order of eutheria. They are aquatic mammals with a 
streamlined body devoid of hair. They have a thick layer of blubber for 
insulation. The hind limbs are absent, and the fore limbs adapted to form 
paddles. 
 
Ceterach 
Ceterach is a genus of ferns of the sub-order Polypodiaceae.  
 
Chaffinch 
The chaffinch is a common British bird of the finch family. 
 
Chamaerops 
Chamaerops is a genus of palms belonging to the northern hemisphere and 
consisting of dwarf trees with fan-shaped leaves borne on prickly 
petioles and a small berry-like fruit with one seed.  
 
Chameleon 
A chameleon is a lizard. It can change colour to suit its surroundings. 
 
Chamois 
The chamois is a ruminating animal found in south Europe and west Asia. 
 
Champak 
The Champak is an Indian tree of the order Magnoliaceae held in high 
esteem by Buddhists. 
 
Chanterelle 
The chanterelle is an edible British mushroom of a bright orange colour.  
 
Characeae 
The Characeae are an order of cryptogamous plants, nearly related to the 
Algae, composed of an axis consisting of parallel tubes which are either 
transparent or incrusted with lime carbonate. 
 
Charadrius 
Charadrius is a genus of birds which includes the lapwing, pratincole and 
oyster-catcher. 
 
Charlock 
Charlock is a common yellow weed, also known as wild mustard. 
 
Chat 
The chat are several species of bird of the thrush family.  
 
Chaulmugra 
Chaulmugra is a tree found in South Asia. The oil was used in India and 
China as a remedy in skin diseases and blood impurities. The medicinal 
use of the oil in skin and chest infections was introduced to Europe and 
America around 1900.  
 
Chaus 
The Chaus is a genus of Asiatic and African lynxes including the Libyan 
chaus and the Caffre-cat. They are fond of water and are excellent 
swimmers.  
 
Chavica 
Chavica is a genus of plants of the order Piperaceae which includes the 
long pepper, Java long pepper and the betel-pepper. 
 
Cheetah 
The cheetah is a member of the cat family.  
 
Cheiranthus 
Cheiranthus is the wall-flower genus of plants. 
 
Cheironectes 
Cheironectes are a genus of acanthopterygious fishes, having the pectoral 
fins supported like short feet upon peduncles. They use these fins to 
crawl over mud and sand when they get left dry be a receeding tide. They 
may also take short leaps like a frog, and from this they are often 
called frog-fish. They are found in North-East Australia.  
 
Chelonia 
The chelonia are an order of anapsida. The trunk is short and broad and 
protected by a carapace and a plastron. The head, neck, tail and limbs 
can be withdrawn under the shields for protection. The jaws are strong, 
but lack teeth.  
 
Chelonians 
The Chelonians are an order of reptiles which includes the tortoise and 
turtle. They are distinguished by a body which is enclosed in a double 
shell, out of which the head, tail and four legs protrude. 
 
Chenopodium 
Chenopodium (Goosefoot) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Chenopodiaceae. They are weedy plants common on wastelands and bear small 
greenish flowers which are sessile in small clusters collected in spiked 
panicles.  
 
Cherry 
The cherry is a fruit tree of the order rosaceae. 
 
Chestnut 
The chestnut is a tree of the order cupuliferae.  
 
Chetah 
Chetah is the old 19th century spelling of Cheetah. 
 
Chick pea 
The chick pea is an annual herb of the order leguminosae. 
 
Chicory 
Chicory is a perennial herb of the order compositae.  
 
Chiffchaff 
The chiffchaff is a small song bird. It visits England in the summer. 
 
Chilopoda 
The chilopoda are the centipede order of myriapoda. The genital aperture 
is posterior.  
 
Chimpanzee 
The chimpanzee is a large anthropoid ape. 
 
Chinchilla 
The chinchilla is a small squirrel like rodent found in the andes.  
 
Chipmunk 
A chipmunk is a species of ground squirrel common in Siberia and north 
America. 
 
Chiroptera 
The chiroptera is an order of eutheria. They are small mammals with 
strong powers of flight. The limb bones are strong and slender. The wings 
are formed of skin. The teeth bear pointed cusps. 
 
Chiru 
The chiru is an antelope found in Tibet.  
 
Chitin 
Chitin is an organic substance which forms part of the exoskeleton of 
arthropods. 
 
Chondrichthyes 
Chondrichthyes is a subclass of fish including the sharks, dogfishes, 
skates and rays. They are fishes with a cartilage endoskeleton. The jaws 
are well formed. 
 
Chordates 
see "phylum_chordata" 
 
Chough 
The chough is a bird of the crow family with red feet and bill. It is 
found on sea cliffs.  
 
Chromosome 
A chromosome is a chemical found in all cells which determines how the 
cell will act. 
 
Chrysalis 
A chrysalis is the inactive state into which larva pass before becoming 
imago.  
 
Chrysanthemum 
The chrysanthemum is a hardy annual plant of the order compositae.  
 
Chrysoplenium 
Chrysoplenium is a genus of annual or perannial rather succulent herbs 
with alternate or opposite crenate leaves and inconspicuous greenish 
axillary and terminal flowers.  
 
Chub 
The chub is a fresh water fish of the carp family.  
 
Cicada 
The cicada is a group of large four winged insects. 
 
Cilia 
Cilia are threads of protoplasm which beat rhythmically.  
 
Ciliata vera 
Ciliata vera are a subclass of ciliophora. They are free swimming 
animals.  
 
Ciliophora 
Ciliophora are a class of protozoa with relatively simple life-histories. 
The locomotor structures are cilia arranged in definite tracts. The cilia 
arise from grooves in the pellicle. Ciliophora have a unique nuclear 
structure, comprised of a meganucleus concerned with trophic activities, 
and a micronucleus concerned with reproduction. 
 
Cinchona 
The cinchona is a tree native to South America with fragrant white or 
pink flowers. The bark contains quinine and other related alkaloids. The 
tree was named in honour of the countess of Chinchon, the vice-Queen of 
Peru after she was cured by cinchona bark in 1638. 
 
Cinnamon 
Cinnamon is a small evergreen tree. 
 
Cirripedia 
Cirripedia is a subclass of crustacea. These are the barnacles. Sedentary 
animals with a reduced head and abdomen.  
 
Cistus 
Cistus, the rock-rose, is a genus of plants of the order Cistaceae native 
to Europe and the countries bordering the Mediterranean.  
 
Civet 
The civet are a family of carnivorous animals similar to the cats.  
 
Clepsine 
The clepsine are hirudinea. 
 
Coati 
The coati is a carnivorous mammal related to the racoon. Found in south 
America and mexico. 
 
Cob nut 
The cob nut is a domesticated variety of the hazel. 
 
Cobra 
The cobra is a venomous snake found in Africa and south Asia. 
 
Coca 
Coca is a shrub.  
 
Coccidia vera 
The coccidia vera are a suborder of coccidiomorpha. They are parasites 
found chiefly in invertebrates, but also in vertebrates. The trophic 
phase is typically intracellular. 
 
Coccidiomorpha 
The coccidiomorpha are an order of sporozoa.  
 
Cochineal 
Cochineal is a insect (Dactylopius coccus) found on cactii in Mexico. The 
dried body of the female is used to prepare the red dye, cochineal. 
 
Cockle 
The Cockle is a Lamellibranchia bivalve mollusc. It is recognised by its 
ribbed, heart-shaped shell. They are found on British shores.  
 
Cocoa 
Cocoa is a small tree native to tropical America. 
 
Cod 
The Cod is a fish of the family Gadidae. They are found in the Atlantic 
and Baltic. 
 
Coelacanthini 
The coelacanthini is a rare order of crossopterygii which was thought to 
be extinct, until a specimen was caught off west africa in 1939. 
 
Coelophysis 
Coelophysis was a cunning and agile carnivorous dinosaur from the 
triassic era. It was 2.5M long and about 1m tall when standing on its 
back legs.  
 
Coffee 
Coffee is a genus of evergreen trees and shrubs of the order rubiaceae. 
 
Collembola 
Collembola is an order of apterygota. The spring tails. 
 
Collie 
The collie is a breed of English sheep dog. 
 
Colorado beetle 
The colorado beetle is a north American beetle that attacks potatoes. 
 
Compositae 
Compositae is the largest known natural order of plants containing over 
12,000 species of herbs or shrubs found all over the world. The flowers 
are numerous and sessile, forming a close head on the dilated top of the 
receptacle and surrounded by an involucre of whorled bracts. The flowers 
are monopetalous. 
 
Compsognathus 
Compsognathus was a tiny carnivorous dinosaur from the jurassic period. 
It was 70cm tall, about the size of a hen. It was a fast and agile 
creature.  
 
Condor 
The condor (Sarcorhamphus gryphus) is a bird. It is one of the American 
vultu res. It is carnivorous. The condor is 4 feet long with a wing span 
of 10 feet.  
 
Coney 
see "Cony" 
 
Confervaceae 
Confervaceae are a family of marine algae which have green fronds which 
are composed of articulated filaments.  
 
Conger-eel 
The Conger eel is a genus of marine eel characterized by a long dorsal 
fin beginning near the nape of the neck, immediately above the origin of 
the pectoral fins, and by having the upper jaw longer than the lower. The 
common conger eel grows to about 10 feet long and weighs more than 100 
pounds.  
 
Coniferae 
Coniferae are the conifers; pines, firs and their allies. 
 
Conirostres 
Conirostres is a subdivision of the order Insessores consisting of genera 
having a stout conical beak. The best known genera are the larks, tits, 
finches, sparrows, crows and linnets. 
 
Conus 
Conus is a genus of gasteropodous molluscs of the family Conidae. They 
are found in the southern and tropical seas. 
 
Convallaria 
Convallaria is a genus of plants of the natural order Liliaceae, the only 
species being the lily-of-the-valley. 
 
Convoluta 
Convoluta is a member of the order rhabdocoelida. 
 
Convolvulaceae 
Convolvulaceae is an order of plants comprising about 700 species of 
climbers.  
 
Convolvulus 
Convolvulus is a genus of plants of the order Convolvulaceae consisting 
of slender twining herbs with milky juice., bell-shaped flowers and five 
free stamens.  
 
Cony 
Cony (or coney) is an old English name for the rabbit.  
 
Conyza 
Conyza is a genus of plants of the natural order Compositae. They are 
annual or perennial herbs found throught warmer regions of the world. 
 
Coot 
The coot is a British water bird of the rail family.  
 
Copaiba 
Copaiba is the common name of several plants of the genus Copaifera, 
natural order Leguminose, which grow in Brazil, Peru and other countries 
in South America. 
 
Copepoda 
Copepoda is a subclass of free-living or parasitic crustaceans without a 
carapace. The antennules are frequently enlarged and used for swimming. 
The thoracic appendages are biramous.  
 
Copper Head 
The copper head (Trigonocephalus contortrix) is a north American snake 
allied to the rattlesnake. 
 
Copper-head 
The copper-head is a north American snake of the rattlesnake family.  
 
Coptis 
Coptis is a small genus of plants of the natural order Ranunculaceae. 
 
Coquito 
The coquito (Juboea spectabilis) is a palm tree found in Chile and allied 
to the coconut. It grows to about 15 meters and its sap when boiled makes 
palm-honey. 
 
Coral 
Coral is a marine organism related to sea anemones. 
 
Corallium 
Corallium is a member of the order alcyonaria.  
 
Coriander 
Coriander (Coriandrum sativum) is an umbelliferous plant native to Italy. 
The fruit, often called a seed though it is not, is dried and used in 
cookery.  
 
Coriaria 
Coriaria is a genus of shrub plants found in southern Europe. They are 
used in tanning and a black dye is extracted from them.  
 
Cormogens 
Cormogens are those plants in which there is a distinct axis of growth. 
They comprise the phanerogams and the higher cryptogams.  
 
Cormorant 
The cormorant (Phalacrocorax) is a genus of birds of the Pelicaniformes 
family. They are divers with long necks and strong, solid beaks. There 
are 30 species.  
 
Corn Marigold 
The Corn Marigold (Chrysanthemum segetum) is a rich orange coloured 
British wild flower.  
 
Corn Salad 
Corn Salad (lamb's-lettuce, Valerianella olitoria) is a plant of the 
order Valerianaceae nati e to Britain and Europe. It is a weak succulent 
herb which grows to about 25cm tall and is used as a salad in early 
spring. 
 
Corn-beetle 
The Corn-beetle (Cucujus testaceus) is a minute beetle, the larva of 
which is often very destructive to stores of grain, particularly wheat.  
 
Corn-cockle 
The corn-cockle (Agrostemma Githago) is a plant of the natural order 
Caryophyllaceae, with large purple flowers.  
 
Corn-crake 
The Corn-crake (landrail, Crex pratensis) is a species of bird of the 
order Grallae of the family Rallidae. It is a wading bird, reddish-brown 
in colour and feeds on worms and insects.  
 
Corn-fly 
Corn-fly is a popular name of several insects of the family Muscidae. 
 
Corn-moth 
The Corn-moth (Tinea granella) is a small moth the larva of which 
destroys corn sheaves in the field. 
 
Corn-thrips 
Corn-thrips is a minute species of thrips which feeds on the juice of 
corn. 
 
Cornaceae 
Cornaceae is a natural order of polypetalous exogens consisting of about 
100 species of plants. 
 
Cornel 
The cornel (cornelian tree) is a species of dogwood tree of the order 
Cornace ae. It is native to Asia and southern Europe. 
 
Cornelian Tree 
see "Cornel" 
 
Cornus 
Cornus is a genus of plants of the natural order Cornaceae. 
 
Coronellidae 
Coronellidae is the smooth snake family of non-venomous snakes. 
 
Coryne 
The coryne is of the order gymnoblastea.  
 
Corypha 
Corypha is a genus of palms which includes the fa-palm, gebang palm and 
taliput.  
 
Corythosaurus 
Corythosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur from the cretaceous period. It had 
a duck-like bill filled with hundreds of tiny teeth which were used for 
mincing leaves. It had a hollow crescent on top of its head.  
 
Cotton 
Cotton is a tropical and sub tropical herbaceous plant. 
 
Cotton-wood 
The cotton-wood is a north American tree. 
 
Cougar 
The cougar is a large American cat. Also called the puma. 
 
Cow 
A cow is a female ox. Also the female of the elephant, rhinocerous, whale 
and seal. 
 
Cow-bunting 
The cow-bunting is a north American bird of the Sturnidae (Starling) 
family. It leaves its own eggs in other birds nests for them to hatch. 
 
Cow-tree 
see "Bread-fruit" 
 
Cowslip 
The Cowslip is a wild flower found in British pastures and hedge-rows. 
The flowers possess sedative properties and used to be made into wine. 
 
Coyote 
The coyote is a type of wild dog found in north America.  
 
Coypou 
The Coypou (Coypu) is a South American rodent about the size of and 
resembling a beaver.  
 
Coypu 
The coypu is a south American water rodent. 
 
Crab 
see "crabs" 
 
Crab-apple 
The Crab-apple is a small, wild and very sour species of English Apple. 
 
Crabs 
Crabs are malacostraca. 
 
Cranberry 
Cranberry is the fruit of the whortleberry bush. It is native to Europe, 
north asia and north America.  
 
Crane 
The crane (Megalornithidae) is a family of birds distinguished by long 
legs and neck and powerful wings.  
 
Crane-fly 
The Crane-fly is a genus of two-winged insects (Daddy-long-legs). 
 
Cranium 
The cranium is the skeleton enclosing the brain.q 
 
Crawfish 
see "Crayfish" 
 
Crayfish 
Crayfish are various crustaceans. The common crayfish is also known as 
the river lobster which resembles the lobster in appearance and habits. 
They are also called crawfish. 
 
Creeper 
The creeper is a family of birds which resemble the woopecker in their 
habbit of creeping up tree trunks. 
 
Cress 
Cress is the name of several species of plants, most of them of the order 
Cruciferae. Water cress is used in salad and was used as a medicine for 
its antiscorbutic properties. 
 
Crinoidea 
The crinoidea are the sea lily class of phylum echinodermata. The body is 
cup shaped and attached to the substratum by a stalk. Both the mouth and 
anus are on the side of the body away from the stalk. The five main arms 
bifurcate, and on the branches are small side branches. 
 
Crocodile 
The crocodile is a large aquatic carnivorous reptile. Related to the 
alligator. 
 
Crocodilia 
Crocodilia is an order of diapsida. They are large reptiles adapted to 
life in rivers and lakes. The tail is flattened from side to side and is 
a powerful swimming tool. 
 
Crossbill 
The crossbill (Loxia) is a genus of birds of the finch family. They are 
distinguished by the crossed tips of the bill.  
 
Crossopterygii 
The crossopterygii is a division of fish known as the lung fishes. They 
have a single or double lung, and a modified heart and vascular system. 
They live in shallow fresh water where oxygen levels are insufficient for 
gills.  
 
Crow 
The crow is a family of 35 species of bird. 
 
Crowberry 
Crowberry is a plant found in northern Europe, Asia, England and 
Scotland.  
 
Cruciferae 
Cruciferae is a family of dicotyledonous flowering plants with cross like 
four petaled flowers. 
 
Crustacea 
Crustacea is the crustacean class of arthropods. They are mainly aquatic 
animals breathing by gills. There are two pairs of antennae and three 
pairs of jaws. 
 
Crustacean 
see "crustacea" 
 
Crustaceans 
see "crustacea" 
 
Cuckoo 
The cuckoo (Cuculidae) is a family of birds. They lay their eggs in the 
nests of other birds. 
 
Cucurbita 
see "Gourd" 
 
Cumacea 
Cumacea is an order of malacostraca where the carapace is small exposing 
four or five of the thoracic segments. The abdomen is slender. 
 
Cunina 
Cunina is a member of the order trachylina. 
 
Curlew 
The curlew is a British water bird. 
 
Cuttle-Fish 
The Cuttle-Fish is a name applied to various ten-armed molluscs of the 
class Cephalopoda. They are distinguished by their internal calcerous 
shell (cuttle bone). 
 
Cyclostomi 
The cyclostomi are a subclass of agnatha. They are modern eel-like 
creatures which eat fish.  
 
Cypress 
Cypress is a family of trees. 
 
Cystoflagellata 
The cystoflagellata are an order of phytomastigina. They are transparent 
plankton.  
 
Dab 
The dab is a marine flat fish.  
 
Dabchick 
The dabchick is an English bird of the grebe family.  
 
Dace 
The dace is a fresh water fish of the carp family.  
 
Dachshund 
The dachshund is a small dog originally bred for badger hunting.  
 
Daffodil 
The daffodil are several species of plant of the genus narcissus. 
 
Dahlia 
The dahlia is a genus of perennial plants of the compositae family. 
 
Daisy 
The daisy is a genus of hardy perennial plants of the compositae family.  
 
Dalbergia 
Dalbergia is a genus of fine tropical forest trees and climbing shrubs of 
the order Leguminosae. The group includes the black-wood tree (also 
called the East Indian rosewood) and the sissoo.  
 
Dalmatian 
The dalmatian is a spotted dog. It was formerly known as the Danish 
spotted or coach dog. 
 
Dames-violet 
Dames-violet (Dames-wort) is a British perennial plant of the order 
Cruciferae. It grows to about 2 to 3 feet tall and flowers in May and 
June. 
 
Dames-wort 
see "Dames-violet" 
 
Dammar Pine 
The dammar pine is a genus of trees of the order Coniferae distinguished 
by their large lanceolated leathery leaves, and by their seeds having a 
wing on one side instead of proceeding from the end. 
 
Damselfly 
The damselfly is a predatory insect with 2 pairs of wings.  
 
Damson 
The damson is a type of plum tree.  
 
Dandelion 
The dandelion is a plant of the order Compositae indigenous to Europe. It 
gets its name from its appearance, dent de lion (French for Lion's 
tooth). The stems are hollow and have one bright yellow flower. The root 
was formerly used as a medicine for liver complaints. 
 
Daphnia 
Daphnia is a genus of minute crustaceans belonging to the division 
Branchiopoda. They are the water-fleas.  
 
Darlingtonia 
Darlingtonia is a genus of American pitcher plants of the order 
Sarraceniceae.  
 
Darnel 
Darnel (Lolium temulentum) is the only poisonous British grass. 
 
Darters 
Darters are a genus of web-footed birds of the pelican family. They are 
found near the eastern coast of tropical parts of north America, the west 
coast of Africa, and in Australia.  
 
Dasyure 
Dasyure are the brush-tailed opossums, a genus of plantigrade marsupials 
found in Australia and Tasmania. 
 
Date 
The date is a tree of the genus phoenix.  
 
Date-plum 
The date-plum is the name given to several trees of the Ebony family. 
Their fruit is edible.  
 
Datura 
Datura is a genius of plants of the order Solanaceae, with large trumpet- 
shaped flowers. They are all poisonous. The genus includes the thorn-
apple. 
 
Daucus 
Daucus is a genus of umbelliferous plants, including the carrot.  
 
Dauw 
The dauw is a species of zebra found in the plains of South Africa north 
of the Orange River. 
 
Dead-nettle 
The dead-nettle is a species of plant of the genus Lamium, order 
Labriatae which resemble the nettle in appearance but have no sting. 
 
Deal-fish 
The deal-fish (Trachypterus arcticus) is a fish found around Iceland and 
Norway. It is between 4 and 8 inches long, a silvery colour and has 
minute scales. The dorsal fin extends along the whole length of the back.  
 
Death-watch beetle 
The death-watch beetle (Anobium tesselatum) is a coleopterous insect that 
inhabits the wood-work of houses. 
 
Decaisnea 
Decaisnea is a genus of plants of the order Lardizabalaceae found on the 
Himalayas. It has erect stalks which look like walking sticks and leaves 
2 feet long. The fruit resembles a cucumber and has a sweet, yellow 
edible pulp.  
 
Decandria 
Decandria is the tenth class of plants. The flowers have 10 stamens, and 
1, 2 3 or more pistils.  
 
Decapoda 
Decapoda is an order of malacostraca. The carapace completely covers the 
thorax. The exopodite of the maxilla is large. There are three pairs of 
maxillipeds. 
 
Deciduous 
Deciduous is a term referring to trees and shrubs that shed their leaves 
each year. 
 
Deer 
The deer is a family of ruminant hoofed mammals (Cervidae) allied to the 
Antelopes. They are distinguished by the presence of antlers.  
 
Deerhound 
The Deerhound is a breed of dog. It originated in the 14th century and 
was bred for stag hunting. 
 
Deinonychus 
Deinonychus was a carnivorous dinosaur of the cretaceous period. It was 
3m long and 1.4M tall. A long tail aided balance as it ran. It had 12cm 
long claws on its feet which were used for tearing flesh from its prey. 
 
Delphinium 
The delphinium is a ranunculaceous plant with irregular shaped flowers. 
 
Demospongia 
The demospongia is a class of sponges with a skeleton of four-rayed 
spicules made of silica, or spongin fibres, or no skeleton at all.  
 
Dendrocoelum 
Dendrocoelum is a member of the order tricladida. 
 
Dhole 
The dhole is a species of wild dog found in Asia. 
 
Diapsida 
The diapsida is a subclass of reptiles. The skull has two temporal 
vacuities. 
 
Didactyla 
The didactyla is an order of metatheria. They are carnivorous and 
insectivorous. The digits are free. 
 
Digenea 
Digenea is an order of trematoda. They are endoparasitic flukes with no 
hooks or posterior sucker. They usually have a ventral sucker and an oral 
sucker. The life history requires an intermediate host, often a mollusc. 
The adults are chiefly parasites of warm-blooded vertebrates.  
 
Digitalis 
Digitalis is a genus of plants of the natural order Scrophulariaceae 
native to Europe and western Asia. The name Digitalis also applies to the 
medicinal extracts from the plants.  
 
Dik dik 
A dik dik is a tiny antelope found in Africa south of the sahara  
 
Dill 
Dill is a herb umbelliferae.  
 
Dingo 
The dingo is wild dog found in Australia. 
 
Dinoflagellata 
The dinoflagellata are an order of phytomastigina. These are the 
planktons. They have a definite capsule made of cellulose. 
 
Dinosaur 
The dinosaurs were a family of reptiles which lived on the earth millions 
of years ago. About 400 types of dinosaur have been identified. Dinosaurs 
ranged in size from about as big as a pigeon to twice the height of a 
giraffe. It is estimated that dinosaurs lived for between 70 and 130 
years, and unusually continued growing for their entire life.  
 
Diphyllobothrium 
Diphyllobothrium is a cestoda.  
 
Diplodinium 
Diplodinium is a member of the order of oligotricha.  
 
Diplopoda 
The diplopoda is the millipede order of myriapoda. They have an anterior 
genital posterior. 
 
Dipnoi 
The dipnoi are an order of crossopterygii. The teeth form crushing 
plates.  
 
Dipper 
The Dipper is a family of birds (Cinclidae) of the order Passeriformes. 
They are allied to the wrens and thrushes but are aquatic.  
 
Dog 
A dog is a domesticated mammal of the order canidae descended from the 
wolf.  
 
Dogfish 
The dogfish is a small shark found in the north east atlantic ocean and 
mediterranean.  
 
Dolphin 
The Dolphin is a genus of cetaceans. They are highly intelligent. 
 
Donkey 
Donkey is another name for ass. 
 
Dory 
The Dory is a sea fish found in the Mediterranean and Atlantic. It is of 
the family Zeidae and order Zeomorphae.  
 
Dotterel 
The dotterel is a bird which visits Britain in the summer.  
 
Dove 
The dove is a bird of the family Columbidae (pigeon). 
 
Dromedary 
A dromedary is a type of Arabian camel. 
 
Dromiceidae 
The Dromiceidae are a family of the order Casuariformes. These are the 
emus. They are found only in Australia and Tasmania. It is incapable of 
flight.  
 
Drone 
A drone is a mature male bee which are produced at the same time as a 
virgin queen for the purpose of continuing the community. 
 
Duck 
A duck is a short legged water bird with webbed feet. 
 
Dunlin 
The dunlin is a British water bird. 
 
Duodenum 
The duodenum is the first part of the intestine.  
 
Eagle 
Eagle is the name given to several large birds of prey of the family 
accipitridae.  
 
Ear-shell 
see "Haliotis" 
 
Earthworm 
see "oligochaeta" 
 
Earwig 
The Earwig (Forifculidae) is a family of the order Dermaptera.  
 
Ebony 
Ebony is a tropical hardwood tree. The wood is black. 
 
Echidna 
The echidna or spiny anteater (Tachyglossus aculeatus) is an egg-laying, 
burrowing, nocturnal mammal. It has no teeth, but a long extensile 
tongue. The echidna is found in rocky districts of Australia. 
 
Echinococcus 
Echinococcus is a cestoda.  
 
Echinoidea 
The echinoidea are a class of phylum echinodermata. They are the sea 
urchins. The body is typically glubular. The skeletal plates fit closely 
together to form a rigid "test". Spines are present.  
 
Echinus 
Echinus are a member of the echinoidea class. 
 
Ecology 
Ecology is a study of the relationship between an organism and its 
environment. 
 
Ectoprocta 
Ectoprocta is a class of phylum polyzoa. They have a u shaped gut and the 
anus opens outside of the circlet of ciliated tentacles.  
 
Edentata 
The Edentata is an order of mammals with no teeth, or very simple teeth 
without enamel. 
 
Egested 
see "egestion" 
 
Egestion 
Egestion is the process of eliminating food which has not been digested.  
 
Egg-plant 
Egg-plant was the 19th century name, and is still used in America to 
describe the plant we now call the aubergine. It is an herbaceous plant 
of the order Solanaceae. The fruit is eaten. 
 
Eider 
The eider is a British coastal duck.  
 
Eimeria 
Eimeria is a member of the coccidia vera order. 
 
Eisenia 
The eisenia are oligochaeta.  
 
Elephant 
The elephant is the two surviving species of the order proboscidea. 
 
Elk 
The elk is a large deer found in north Europe, Asia and Scandinavia.  
 
Elm 
The elm is a tree of the family ulmaceae. 
 
Embryology 
Embryology is the study of animal development.  
 
Emu 
The emu is a flightless bird found in Australia.  
 
Entoprocta 
Entoprocta is a class of phylum polyzoa. They have a u shaped gut and the 
anus opens within a circlet of ciliated tentacles.  
 
Epiphytes 
see "Air-plants" 
 
Epistylis 
Epistylis is a member of the order of peritricha. 
 
Equisetum 
Equisetum is the Horse-tail genus of plants.  
 
Eucalyptus 
Eucalyptus is a tree native to Australia where it is called the gum tree. 
 
Euglenoidina 
The euglenoidina are an order of phytomastigina. They have an elongated 
spindle-shaped body and swim in a spiral path.  
 
Euoplocephalus 
Euoplocephalus was an armoured herbivore dinosaur from the cretaceous 
period. Even its eyelids were armoured. At the end of its powerful tail 
was a bulb. The tail could have been used to disable predators attacking 
it.  
 
Euphausiacea 
Euphausiacea is an order of malacostraca. The carapace encloses the 
thorax. There is one set of gills.  
 
Euplectella 
The euplectella is a member of the hexactinellida class.  
 
Euplotes 
Euplotes is a member of the order of hypotricha.  
 
Euspongia 
The euspongia, or bath sponge, is a member of the demospongia class.  
 
Eutheria 
The eutheria are a subclass of higher mammals. The young are born as 
miniature adults after a prolonged period of gestation.  
 
Excretion 
Excretion is the process of getting rid of unwanted substances from 
within the body.  
 
Faeces 
Faeces is the term applied to egested food. 
 
Falcon 
The falcon is a bird of prey. 
 
Fasciola 
Fasciola is a member of the order digenea.  
 
Fennec 
The fennec is a small nocturnal desert fox found in north Africa and 
Arabia.  
 
Fennel 
Fennel is a perennial umbelliferae. 
 
Filaria 
Filaria is a phylum nematoda. 
 
Finch 
The finch is a popular name of the Fringillidae.  
 
Firefly 
Firefly is a popular name for winged insects possessing luminosity. 
 
Fish 
see "pisces" 
 
Fish-hawk 
Fish-hawk is an American name for the Osprey. 
 
Fish-louse 
The fish-louse are several crustaceans of the order Ichthyophthira which 
are parasitic on fish. 
 
Fishes 
see "pisces" 
 
Fissurellidae 
Fissurellidae is a family of gasteropodous molluscs resembling the 
limpets in appearance and habits, but differing in structure. They are 
generally too large for their shell, and so it appears that the shell is 
rudimentary. 
 
Fistularia 
Fistularia is a genus of acanthopterygious fish characterized by the 
elongation of the facial bones into a long fistula or tube at the 
extremity of which the mouth opens.  
 
Fistulina 
Fistulina is a genus of Fungi, allied to Boletus, found on old oak, 
walnut, ash, beech and horse chestnut trees. It is eaten in Europe 
grilled and is said to taste like broiled meat.  
 
Flamingo 
The flamingo is a bird of the genus Phoenicopterus allied to the ducks. 
The flamingo has long legs and stands about 180 cm tall. The beak is 
naked, lamellate at the edges and bent. Flamingos are generally pink or 
scarlet in colour and live in southern Europe and northern Africa around 
sea coasts and salt marshes.  
 
Flatworm 
Flatworm is a common name for phylum platyhelminthes. 
 
Flatworms 
see "flatworm" 
 
Flax 
Flax is a popular name of plants of the genus Linum, natural order 
Linaceae of which there are roughly 100 species. They are herbs or small 
shrubs with narrow leaves and yellow, blue or white flowers arranged in 
variously formed cymes. 
 
Flea 
The flea is several insects constituting the order Aphaniptera. They are 
small with two eyes, six feet and piercing stilets and a suctorial 
proboscis which is used to feed on the blood of animals. They can leap 
amazing distances. 
 
Flounder 
A flounder is one of the flat-fishes, family Pleuronectidae, genus 
Pleuronectes. The flounder is found in the sea and near the mouths of 
large rivers around the British coast. 
 
Fluke 
Fluke is a parasitic flatworm that causes rot and dropsy of the liver.  
 
Flustra 
Flustra is an ectoprocta. 
 
Fly-catcher 
The fly-catcher is several species of insectivorous birds of the genus 
Muscicapa with a bill flattened at the base, almost triangular, notched 
at the upper mandible and beset with bristles. They perch on branches and 
wait motionless for passing insects which they dart at and catch with a 
snap of the bill.  
 
Flying Gurnard 
The Flying Gurnard (Trigla volitans) is a Mediterranean fish of the 
Gurnard genus.  
 
Flying-fox 
The flying-fox or fox-bat is a fruit-eating bat of the family Pteropidae 
including some of the largest of the bats, one species reaching 140 cm in 
length across the wings! Flying-foxes are found in Australia, Asia and 
Africa. 
 
Flying-lemur 
The flying-lemur is an insectivorous mammal native to India. They have a 
membrane which extends as a broad expansion from the nape of the neck to 
the tail which they use to glide when leaping from tree to tree.  
 
Flying-squrrel 
The flying-squrrel is a genus of rodent animals of the squirrel family. 
The skin of the flank, extending between the fore and hind legs allows 
them to glide and make great leaps. Flying-squrrels are found in Europe, 
Asia and North America. 
 
Foraminifera 
Foraminifera is an order of animals of low type belonging to the class 
Rhizopoda, sub-order Protozoa, furnished with a shell or test, simple or 
complex, usually perforated by pores called foramina from which the 
animals get their name. 
 
Forest-fly 
The forest-fly is a two-winged fly parasitic on birds and quadrupeds. 
 
Forficulidae 
see "earwig" 
 
Forget-me-not 
Forget-me-not is a common British plant of the natural order Boraginaceae 
found growing in damp or wet places. It is a pretty flower considered as 
the emblem of friendship throughout Europe.  
 
Fowl 
The term fowl was once used as a synonym for bird, but since around 1900 
the term fowl has come to refer to birds of the genus Gallus. They 
resemble the pheasants, but the crown of the head is generally naked and 
furnished with a fleshy comb, the base of the lower mandibles also bears 
fleshy lobes (wattles). 
 
Fox 
The fox is an animal of the genus Vulpes closely allied to the dog, with 
a straight bushy tail, elongated pupils and erect ears. Foxes are 
intelligent, adaptable and omnivorous, consuming small animals, eggs, 
honey and refuse.  
 
Fox-bat 
see "Flying-fox" 
 
Foxglove 
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) is a common British flower of the natural 
order Scrophulariaceae. It grows on banks and pastures. The flowers are 
campanulate and resemble the fingers of a glove, hence the name. Foxglove 
posesses diuretic, narcotic and sedative qualities which are used in 
medicine. It is also deadly in sufficient quantity.  
 
Foxhound 
The Foxhound is a breed of dog bred for chasing foxes. The foxhound is 
smaller than the staghound, its average height being about 53 cm.  
 
Foxtail-grass 
Foxtail-grass is a grass of the genus Alopecurus so called because of the 
close cylindrical panicle in which the spikelets of flowers are arranged 
which look rather like a fox's tail. 
 
Francolin 
The francolin is a genus of birds belonging to the same family as the 
partridge which they resemble except for one or more strong and sharp 
horny spurs on the tarsi. 
 
Frasera 
Frasera is a genus of plants of the natural order Gentianaceae containing 
seven species of erect perennial herbs native to North America. 
 
Fratercula 
Fratercula is a genus of web-footed birds which contains the puffin.  
 
Fraxinella 
Fraxinella is a species of dittany. It is an ornamental herbaceous annual 
plant cultivated for its fragrant leaves and rose-coloured flowers. 
 
Fraxinus 
Fraxinus is a genus of deciduous trees of the order Oleaceae which 
includes the ash.  
 
French Beans 
French Beans is a twining annual plant with alternate leaves on 
footstalks composed of three oval pubescent folioles. The seeds are 
shaped rather like a kidney, and from this the plant gets its alternative 
name, the Kidney Bean.  
 
French Oak 
The French Oak is a tree of the genus Catalpa. It contains a lot of 
tannin in its bark. 
 
Frigate-bird 
The frigate-bird is a tropical, web-footed bird of the family 
Pelecanidae. The male bird reaches 1 meter in length, including the tail, 
but the body is comparatively small. The bill is longer than the head, 
hooked at the end and sharp. The wings are very large, and the bird has a 
wing span of over 2 meters.  
 
Fringillidae 
Fringillidae is a large family of conirostral birds comprising the 
finches. 
 
Fringillidea 
Fringillidea is the Finch family of birds. They are a large family of 
small seed-eating birds found in all parts of the world. Fringillidea 
belong to the order Insessores, section Conirostres. They are 
distinguished by having a sharply-pointed, conical, and in most cases 
strongly-formed, bill suitable for crushing seeds and other hard objects. 
 
Fritillary 
Fritillary is a genus of plants of the order Liliaceae, native to 
northern temperate regions. 
 
Frog 
The frog is an anura with four legs, four toes on the fore feet and five 
on the hind. The feet are more-or-less webbed. The body is naked and has 
no ribs and no tail. The tongue is fleshy and attached in front to the 
jaw but is free behind so that it can be protruded.  
 
Frog-fish 
see "Cheironectes" 
 
Frogs 
see "frog" 
 
Froth-fly 
The froth-fly is an insect of the family Cercopidae, the larvae of which 
is found in a frothy exudation on plants (Cuckoo-spit).  
 
Fruit-pigeon 
Fruit-pigeons are pigeons of the genus Carpophagus. They have brilliant 
plumage and are found in India and Australia. They are so named because 
they eat nothing but fruit. 
 
Fucaceae 
Fucaceae is a natural order of dark-coloured algae consisting of olive-
coloured inarticulate seaweeds distinguished from other algae by their 
reproductive organs which consist of archegonia and antheridia, contained 
in common chambers, united in club-shaped receptacles at the ends of the 
fronds.  
 
Fucus 
Fucus is a genus of seaweeds of the family Fucaceae comprising several 
common seaweeds with a flat or compressed forked frond, sometimes 
containing air vessels.  
 
Fulmar 
The fulmar is a sea bird which lives on the sub-arctic shores of the 
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 
 
Fumariaceae 
Fumariaceae is a small natural order of exogenous plants closely allied 
to Papaveraceae. The species are slender-stemmed, herbaceous plants, 
generally erect, though some climb by means of their twisting leaf-
stalks. 
 
Funaria 
Funaria is a genus of mosses. 
 
Fungi 
Fungi is a large natural order of cryptogamous plants, Fungi agree with 
algae and lichens in their cellular structure, which is, with few 
exceptions, devoid of anything resembling vascular tissue; but differing 
from them in deriving their nutrition from the body on which the grow, 
not from the medium by which they are surrounded. 
 
Furze 
see "Gorse" 
 
Fusus 
Fusus is a genus of gasteropodous molluscs nearly allied to Murex with a 
spindle-shaped univalve shell. 
 
Gadidae 
Gadidae is a family of malacopterous fish including the cod, ling and 
haddock.  
 
Gadwall 
The gadwall (Anas strepera) is a species of duck. It is common in North 
America, and rare in Britain. It is not so large as a mallard and has 
long pointed wings and a vigorous and rapid flight. 
 
Galbulinae 
The galbulinae are a family of tropical American fissirostal birds allied 
to the trogons and kingfishers. 
 
Galeidae 
Galeidae is the tope family of small sharks.  
 
Galemys 
The galemys are a genus of mammals allied to the shrews. They live in 
burrows at the sides of streams and feed on insects.  
 
Galeopsis 
Galeopsis is a genus of plants of the natural order Labiatae 
characterized by the equally five-toothed calyx. They are herbaceous 
plants with square stems usually clothed with sharp bristly hairs, 
nettle-like leaves on long stalks, and red, white or yellow labiate 
flowers. 
 
Gall-fly 
Gall-fly is a name for several hymenopterous insects of the family 
Cynipidae, which form galls, each species prefering a different plant. 
The gall is due to an iritating fluid which the insect deposits on the 
plant along with its egg.  
 
Galliwasp 
The galliwasp is a species of lizard about 30cm long and stout and plump. 
It is generally brown in colour and is native to the West Indies and was 
particularly common in Jamaica during the 19th century.  
 
Galls 
Galls (gall-nuts) are a vegetable excrescence produced by the deposit of 
the egg of an insect in the bark or leaves of a plant. 
 
Gamete 
A gamete is one of the two cells which fuse together to commence 
reproduction.  
 
Gametes 
see "gamete" 
 
Gannet 
The gannet is a British sea bird of the genus Sula, family Pelecanidae. 
It is about 1 meter long and the plummage is dirty white or grey. The 
bill is straight, and about 15 cm long. 
 
Ganoid 
The ganoids are an order of fish characterized by angular, rhombic, 
polygonal or circular scales composed of horny or bony plates covered 
with a thick plate of a glossy enamel like substance. 
 
Gaper-shell 
The gaper-shell is a lamellibranchiate mollusc common on British coasts. 
It has a rectangular shell and burrows in sand and mud.  
 
Gar-fish 
The gar-fish (sea-pike, gar-pike, sea-needle) is a long and slender sea 
fish of the genus Belone, about 90cm long. The head projects forward into 
a very long sharp snout. The sides and belly are of a bright silvery 
colour and the back is green.  
 
Gar-pike 
see "Gar-fish" 
 
Garcinia 
Garcinia is a genus of plants of the natural order Guttiferae.  
 
Garden-warbler 
The garden-warbler is a migratory song-bird which visits Britain from the 
end of April to September. It is about 15cm long, the head and upper 
surfaces are greenish brown and the underside is brownish white. 
 
Gardenia 
Gardenia is a genus of trees and shrubs of the natural order 
Cinchonaceae. They are native to trpoical Asia and Africa and have pretty 
white or yellowish flowers and a powerful fragance.  
 
Garganey 
The garganey is a small British duck. 
 
Garlic 
Garlic is a perennial liliaceae with an edible bulb divided into segments 
known as cloves.  
 
Garrot 
Garrot is a popular name of ducks of the genus Clangula. They are oceanic 
ducks with a bill shorter than the head, and are widely distributed over 
the temperate regions of Europe and America. 
 
Garrulus 
Garrulus is a genus of insessorial birds of the crow family.  
 
Gasteropod 
The gasteropods are a class of mollusc, consisting of animals inhabiting 
a univalve shell, although some of the group are wholly devoid of a 
shell. Generally the shell is cone-shaped and spiral. The distinguishing 
characteristic is the foot, which is broad, muscular and disc-like and 
attached to the ventral surface. 
 
Gasteropoda 
see "Gasteropod" 
 
Gasteropods 
see "Gasteropod" 
 
Gasterosteus 
Gasterosteus is a genus of fish which comprises the sticklebacks. 
 
Gastropod 
see "gasteropod" 
 
Gastropoda 
see "gasteropod" 
 
Gaur 
The gaur (or gour) is one of the larget of the ox tribe found in the 
mountain jungles of India it is renowned for its shoulder hide, which 
even when dried is often more than 5cm thick, and was used to make 
shields.  
 
Gavial 
The gavial (Gavialis gangeticus) is the Indian crocodile. It is 
characterized by narrow, almost cylindrical jaws which form a very long 
elongated muzzle. It has 120 teeth, of equal length, and the feet are 
webbed. 
 
Gaviiformes 
The Gaviiformes are an order of birds. These are the divers or loons. 
They are water birds with legs set very far back and webbed feet. The 
bill is long and pointed for catching fish. 
 
Gazelle 
The gazelle (Gazella dorcas) are various species of small, fast running 
antelope (the Gazellinae).  
 
Gean 
The gean (Prunus Avium) is a wild cherry tree found in Britain. It has 
fruit which are red when unripe, and a deep purple or black when ripe. 
The timber can be used for making furniture.  
 
Gebang Palm 
The gebang palm (Corypha gebanga) is a fan-leaved palm of south east 
Asia. Sago is extracted from its pith and its leaves are used for thatch, 
hats, baskets and bags. The root is used in medicine and the fibres of 
the leaf stalks are used for making ropes, nets and cloth.  
 
Gecko 
The Gecko are a family of nocturnal lizards (Gekotidae) characterized by 
the general flatness of their form, especially of the head, which is 
rather triangular. The body is covered on the upper part with numerous 
round prominences or warts and the feet are rather short with toes nearly 
equal in length and furnished with flattened suction pads which enable 
the gecko to run up perpendicular walls.  
 
Gelada 
The gelada is an Ethiopian baboon. It has a heavy mane which hangs over 
its shoulders.  
 
Gelsemium 
The gelsemium is a woody vine found in Asia and southern America. 
 
Gemma 
A gemma is a small cellular body that separates from the mother-plant and 
starts a new one. It is common in moss and liverwort. 
 
Gemsbok 
The gemsbok (Oryx gazella) is a large powerful member of the antelope 
family inhabiting the plains of South Africa. 
 
Genes 
Genes are hereditary information material arranged in a single row along 
the length of each chromosome. 
 
Genet 
The genet is a digitigrade carnivorous mammal of the family Viverridae. 
It is about the size of a small cat, but longer. Genets were used in 
Constantinople (Istanbul) to catch rats. The genet is common around the 
mediterranean. 
 
Genipap 
Genipap is the fruit of the Genipa americana tree, of the natural order 
Rubiaceae. It is about the size of an orange and has a pleasant vinous 
flavour. 
 
Genista 
Genista is a genus of leguminous plants consisting of about 100 species.  
 
Gentian 
see "Gentiana" 
 
Gentiana 
Gentiana is a genus of bitter herbaceous plants which have opposite, 
often strongly ribbed leaves, and blue, yellow or red, often showy 
flowers. The calyx consists of four or five valvate segments, and the 
corolla is four or five parted. The fruit is a two-valved, one celled, 
many-seeded capsule. 
 
Gentianaceae 
see "Gentiana" 
 
Geotrupidae 
Geotrupidae are a family of burrowing lamellicorn beetles.  
 
Geraniaceae 
Geraniaceae is a natural order of exogenous plants the distinguishing 
character of which is to have a fruit composed of five capsules or cases, 
connected with as many flat styles, consolidated around a long conical 
beak.  
 
Geranium 
The Geranium is the typical genus of the order Geraniaceae of plants. 
 
Germander 
The germander are plants of the genus Teucrium. 
 
Gervas 
Gervas (Stachytarpheta jamaicensis) is a small shrub of the natural order 
Verbenaceae. It is native to the West Indies and warm parts of America. 
Its leaves were used to make Brazilian tea and to adulterate tea in 
Britain in the 19th century.  
 
Geum 
Geum is a genus of hardy herbaceous perennials, belonging to the natural 
order Rosaceae, chiefly natives of the northern hemisphere.  
 
Ghost-moth 
The ghost-moth is a nocturnal lepidopterous insect (Hepialus humuli), so 
called from the male being of a white colour, and from its habit of 
hovering with a pendulum-like motion in the twilight over one spot where 
the female is concealed.  
 
Gibbon 
A gibbon is a type of small ape of the genus Hylobates, particularly the 
species Hylobates lar which inhabits the islands of the Indian 
Archipelago. It is noticeable by the extraordinary length of its arms and 
its slender form. 
 
Gibel 
The gibel (Cyprinus gibelio) is a fish of the carp genus. It is also 
called the Prussian Carp. The gibel rarely weighs more than 250 gms. 
 
Gill 
Gills are very efficient organs of respiration found in fish and the 
early development stages of amphibians. They are highly vascular and are 
bathed in oxygen containing water from which the oxygen is extracted. 
 
Gilthead 
The gilthead (Chrysophrys aurata) is an acanthopterygious fish of the 
Sparidae or sea-bream family common in the Mediterranean. It has strong 
grinding teeth which it uses to crush the shells of the molluscs on which 
it feeds. It has a yellow band which extends from eye to eye, and 
typically weighs 9kg. 
 
Ginger 
Ginger is a perennial plant of the order Zingiberaceae found in south 
east Asia, the West Indies, South America and Africa of which Jamaican 
ginger is the most prized. 
 
Gingko 
The gingko are coniferous trees of the genus Salisburia belonging to the 
yew family and which are native to China and Japan.  
 
Ginkgo 
The ginkgo is a tree related to the conifers and native to China and 
Japan. 
 
Ginseng 
Ginseng (Panax schinseng) is a plant of Northern Asia of the order 
Araliaceae. It is herbaceous and grows to about 30cm tall. Its root has 
long been regarded by the Chinese as a source of sexual potency. 
 
Giraffe 
The giraffe is the tallest mammal, found only in Africa south of the 
sahara.  
 
Girdle of Venus 
The Girdle of Venus is an animal of the Ctenophora found in the 
Mediterranean.  
 
Gladiolus 
Gladiolus are a genus of plants of the iris order, having a bulbous root 
with a reticulated covering. They are natives of Europe and north Africa, 
but especially South Africa. The leaves are ensiform and the flowers 
brilliantly coloured. 
 
Glass Snake 
The Glass Snake is a lizard of the genus Ophiosaurus which resembles a 
snake in form and reaches a length of 1 meter. The joints of the tail are 
not connected by caudal muscles and so the tail is very brittle and 
joints break off when the animal is even slightly irritated. 
 
Glasswort 
Glasswort are plants of the genus Salicornia, natural order 
Chenopodiaceae. They are succulent marine herbs growing abundantly on the 
coasts of southern Europe and north Africa. When burnt their ashes yield 
soda which was once used in making glass, hence the name glasswort.  
 
Gleditschia 
Gleditschia is a genus of plants of the order Leguminosae to which the 
honey-locust belongs.  
 
Globe-fish 
Globe-fish is a popular name applied to several fish of the genera Diodon 
and Tetraodon of the order Plectognathi, on account of their ability to 
assume a globular form by swallowing air or water which inflates a 
ventral sac and inflates the whole animal like a balloon.  
 
Globe-flower 
The globe-flower (Trollius europaeus) is a European plant of the natural 
order Ranunculaceae. It is found in mountainous regions and has five-
lobed, deaply serrated leaves and round pale-yellow blossoms the sepals 
of which are large and conspicuous while the petals are very small. 
 
Globigerina 
Globigerina is one of the Foraminifera, a microscopic animal having a 
many-celled shell found fossilised in the chalk and tertiary formations 
and alive in the seas where shells of the abundant dead animals form vast 
calcareous deposits of mud known as globigerina ooze. 
 
Gloriosa 
Gloriosa is a genus of tuberous-rooted climbing herbs of the natural 
order Liliaceae, so named from their splendid flowers. They have branched 
stems and flowers mostly of a pretty red and yellow colour, with six long 
lanceolate undulated segments, which are entirely reflexed.  
 
Glow-worm 
The glow-worm is an insect of the genus Lampyris, natural order 
Coleoptera. The name glow-worm is only really applicable to the female, 
which is without wings, resembling a caterpillar, and emits a shining 
green light from the extremity of the abdomen. The male is winged, and 
flies about in the evening when it is attracted by the light of the 
female.  
 
Gloxinia 
Gloxinia is a genus of plants of the natural order Gesneraceae, 
distinguished by the corolla apprroaching to bell-shaped, the upper lip 
shortest and two-lobed, the lower three-lobed, with the middle lobe 
largest, and also by the summit of the style being rounded and hollowed. 
The species are native to tropical America and were introduced into 
Britian in the 19th century. 
 
Glutton 
The glutton (Gulo arcticus) (Wolverene, Wolverine) is a carnivorous 
quadruped, about the size of a large badger, and intermediate between the 
bear family and the weasels. It inhabits northern Europe and America. 
 
Glycyrrhiza 
Glycyrrhiza is a genus of leguminous plants.  
 
Gmelina 
Gmelina is a genus of plants of the order Verbenaceae found in Asia. All 
the species form either shrubs or trees, some providing valuable timber. 
 
Gnaphalium 
Gnaphalium is a genus of widely-spread composite plants which have their 
foliage usually covered with a white wooly down, and their flower-heads 
of the ecerlasting kind. 
 
Gnat 
Gnat is a popular name for several species of insects of the genus Culex. 
 
Gnathostomata 
Gnathostomata is a branch of the sub-phylum craniata group of animals. 
The mouth is bounded by jaws which are formed from the mandibular 
visceral arch. 
 
Gnu 
The gnu (wildebeeste) is an antelope found in Africa. Both sexes have 
have horns projecting slightly outwards and downwards, then forming an 
abrupt upward bend. They have bristly black hair about the face and 
muzzle, a white stiff mane, and horse-like tail. They reach a length of 
about 270cm and a height at the shoulder of about 120cm. 
 
Goat 
The goat is a ruminant mammal of the genus Capra. They are slightly 
smaller than a sheep, but stronger, more agile and less timid.  
 
Goat's-beard 
Goat's-beard is a popular name of plants of the genus Tragopogon, order 
Compositae, which are herbaceous perennials, chiefly natives of Europe. 
The seeds have feathery appendages from which the plants get their name.  
 
Goat's-rue 
Goat's-rue (Galega officinalis) is a leguminous plant indigenous to 
southern Europe. It is used as forage and was once used as a cordial to 
treat fever and convulsions.  
 
Goat's-thorn 
Goat's-thorn is the name given to two hard evergreen plants of the genus 
Astragalus.  
 
Goat-moth 
The goat-moth (Cossus ligniperda) is a large British moth. The larvae are 
about 7cm long and hollow out galleries in trees and form cocoons from 
the sawdust in which the chrysalids are formed. The larval condition 
lasts for three years. The fully-developed insect is ash-coloured, with 
numerous small black lines on the first pair of wings.  
 
Goatsucker 
Goatsucker is a popular name of birds of the genus Caprimulgus. They got 
the name from the incorrect assertion that the birds suck goats. The 
goatsuckers actually feed on nocturnal insects and beetles which are 
caught as the bird flies with its mouth open.  
 
Gobiidae 
see "Goby" 
 
Goby 
Goby is the popular name of a family of acanthopterous fish (Gobiidae) 
characterized as having two dorsal fins nearly united into one, the 
anterior fin having flexible rays, not spinous. The ventral fins are 
thoracic and united more or less by their bases. the body is scaly and 
the head unarmed. there are about 400 species of goby. 
 
Godwinia 
Godwinia is a genus of plants of the natural order Araceae. 
 
Godwit 
Godwit is a popular name for birds of the genus Limosa or the family 
Scolopacidae.  
 
Gold of Pleasure 
Gold of Pleasure (Camelina sativa) is a cruciferous annual of the order 
Brassicaceae, with stem-clasping leaves and terminal racemes of yellow 
flowers which produce pear-shaped pods containing numerous small seeds.  
 
Golden-beetle 
Golden-beetle is a popular name for several tetramerous beetles of the 
genus Chrysomela. There are some British species, but most are tropical. 
They are characterized by their brilliant colouring.  
 
Golden-crested Regulus 
see "Golden-crested_Wren" 
 
Golden-crested Wren 
The Golden-crested Wren (Golden-crested Regulus, Kinglet, Regulus 
cristatus) is a beautiful bird belonging to the family Sylviadae, 
distinguished by an orange crest. It is the smallest of British birds, 
being only 8cm long, very agile and almost continually in motion. The 
upper part of the body is yellowish olive green and the under parts are 
pale reddish white. It lives mostly in tall trees, particularly the oak, 
yew, pine and fir.  
 
Golden-rod 
Golden-rod (Solidago) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Compositae. They are chiefly natives of North America. Most of the 
species have erect, rod-like, scarcely branched stems, with alternate 
serrated leaves, and terminal spikes of small yellow flowers.  
 
Golden-saxifrage 
Golden-saxifrage is a popular name for Chrysoplenium. 
 
Goldfinch 
The Goldfinch (Fringilla carduelis) is a common British bird of the Finch 
family. It is about 13cm long and the plumage is a mixture of black, 
scarlet, yellow and white colours. 
 
Goldfish 
The goldfish is a member of the carp family found in east Asia. 
 
Goliath-beetle 
The goliath-beetles are beetles of the genus Goliathus which are native 
to Africa and South America and are so named on account of their 
remarkable large size which can reach 10cm. They are eaten in South 
America. 
 
Gomuti Palm 
The Gomuti Palm (Saguerus saccharifer) is the sago-palm and yields a 
bristly fibre known as gomuti or ejoo which is manufactured into cordage, 
and used for thatching. The sweet juice of the palm is fermented into a 
toddy by natives. The Gomuti Palm is also one of the chief sago producing 
palms. 
 
Gonad 
see "gonads" 
 
Gonads 
The gonads are essential reproductive organs. 
 
Goosander 
The goosander is a duck found in Scotland.  
 
Goose 
The goose is a bird of the genus Anser. 
 
Gooseberry 
Gooseberry (Ribes grossularia) is a low branching shrub growing wild in 
Siberia and northern Europe. It is part of the order Grossulariaceae. the 
branches are armed with numerous prickles and bear three to five lobed 
leaves and inconspicuous flowers. The fruit is a succulent berry which 
makes rather good eating. 
 
Goosefoot 
see "Chenopodium" 
 
Gopher 
The gopher is a burrowing rodent found in north and central America.  
 
Gorgonia 
Gorgonia is a member of the order of alcyonaria.  
 
Gorilla 
The gorilla is the largest anthropoid ape, found in west Africa.  
 
Gorse 
Gorse (furze, whin) is a plant of the family leguminosae. It is a low 
shrubby plant, the stem generally 80cm to 1m high, much branched and most 
of the leaves converted into spines. The flowers are solitary and yellow. 
 
Goshawk 
The goshawk (Astur palumbarius) is a raptorial bird of the genus Astur. 
It grows to around 60cm long, has deep brown plumage and was much used in 
falconry. It flies low and pursues its prey in a line after it. 
 
Goura 
Goura is a genus of large pigeons native to Papua New Guinea comprising 
about six species known as crowned pigeons which are remarkable for their 
large size and open erect crest with which the head is adorned. They 
spend most of their time on the ground and nest in low branches. 
 
Gourd 
Gourd (Cucurbita) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Cucurbitaceae.  
 
Grain-moth 
The grain-moth is two species of very small moth whose larvae eat grain 
in granaries. The moths have narrow, fringed wings of a satin lustre. 
 
Graining 
The graining is a fish of the dace kind found chiefly in the 
Mediterranean and its tributaries and in some of the Swiss lakes. The 
nose is more rounded than that of the dace, the eye larger, and the 
dorsal fin commences half-way between the point of the nose and the end 
of the fleshy portion of the tail. 
 
Grakle 
Grakle is a genus of birds of the order Passeres and of the starling 
family. They are found in India and New Guinea.  
 
Grallatores 
Grallatores is an order of birds. They are generally wading-birds and 
frequent the banks of streams and marshes. They have long legs and a long 
beak. 
 
Graminaceae 
see "Grass" 
 
Grampus 
The grampus are several marine cetaceous mammals allied to the dolphins. 
Grampus are found in the Atlantic and North Sea. They grow to about 8 
meters long, and are very thick in proportion to their length with a 
black back and white belly. On each shoulder is a white spot. Grampus are 
carnivorous and voracious and will attack even whales.  
 
Grantia 
The grantia is a member of the calcarea class.  
 
Grapple-plant 
The grapple-plant is a South African procumbent plant of the natural 
order Pedaliacea. the seeds have many hooked thorns which cling to the 
mouths of grazing cattle causing considerable pain. 
 
Grass 
Grass (Graminaceae) is an extensive order of endogenous plants comprising 
about 250 genera and 4500 species. The roots are fibrous; the stem is 
usually cylindrical and jointed varying length from a few centimeters to 
30 meters in the case of the bamboo. 
 
Grass-tree 
The Grass-tree (Xanthorrhoea) is a genus of Australian plants pf the 
natural order Liliaceae. They have shrubby stems with tufts of long 
grass-like wiry foliage, from the centre of which arises the tall flower-
stalks which sometimes reach a height of 5 meters and bear dense 
cylindrical spikes of blossom at their summit. 
 
Grass-wrack 
Grass-wrack (Sea-Grass, Zostera marina) is a phanerogamous plant 
belonging to the Naiadeae, forming green beds at the bottom of the sea 
where it is shallow. The ash contains soda. 
 
Grasses 
see "Grass" 
 
Grasshopper 
The grasshopper are various leaping inscets of the order Orthoptera 
nearly akin to the locusts. They are characterized by long and slender 
legs, the thighs of the hind legs are large and adapted for leaping; by 
large and delicate wings and by the wing covers extending far beyond the 
extremity of the abdomen. They are generally of a greenish colour.  
 
Gratiola 
Gratiola is a genus of plants of the natural order Scrophulariaceae 
containing about twenty species of herbs, widely distributed through the 
extra-tropical regions of the world. 
 
Grayling 
Grayling is a genus of fish of the family Salmonidae. The common grayling 
is found in English streams and in Scotland. Grayling prefer rapid 
streams where the water is cool and clear, and the bottom sandy or 
pebbly. Grayling are yellowish-brown with a white under-belly.  
 
Grebe 
see "Podiceps" 
 
Green Gage 
Green Gage is a variety of plum.  
 
Green-brier 
Green-brier (Smilax rotundifolia) is a thorny climbing shrub having a 
yellow-green stem and thick leaves with small bunches of flowers. It is 
very common in America. 
 
Green-dragon 
Green-dragon (Arisoema Dracontium) is a North American herbaceous plant 
of the arum family. It is also known as wake-robin. 
 
Greenfinch 
The greenfinch is a bird of the finch family common in Europe and north 
Africa. 
 
Greenheart 
The greenheart (Nectandra Rodioei) is a tree of the natural order 
Lauraceae. It is native to Guiana where it is also called the bebeeru. 
The bark contains the alkaloid bebeerine.  
 
Greenshank 
The greenshank (Totanus glottis) is a species of sand-piper often called 
the whistling snipe from the shrill note it utters when first disturbed. 
It breeds commonly in the Hebrides and sometimes in northern Scotland and 
is a visitor to the coasts and marshes of Britain.  
 
Gregarina 
Gregarina is a member of the gregarinida order. 
 
Gregarinida 
Gregarinida are an order of sporozoa. They are parasites which live in 
invertebrates, and are found in the gut, colon and tissues.  
 
Gregarinidae 
Gregarinidae are a class of minute animal organisms comprising the lowest 
forms of Protozoa found parasitic in various animals, especially the 
cockroach and earthworm. The Gregarinidae consist of an outer colourless 
transparent membrane, with only faint signs of a fibrillous structure 
inclosing a granular mass in which there is a nucleus surrounded by a 
clear space.  
 
Grey buck 
see "Grysbok" 
 
Grey Gurnard 
The Grey Gurnard (Trigla gurnardus) is a common British fish of the 
Gurnard genus.  
 
Greyhound 
The greyhound is a variety of dog distinguished by a greater length of 
muzzle than any other; very low forehead, short lips, thin and long legs, 
small muscles, contracted belly and semipendant ears. They are bred for 
racing, being the fastest running dogs.  
 
Grilse 
A grilse is a young salmon after it returns to the sea from the fesh 
water for the first time.  
 
Grisbok 
see "Grysbok" 
 
Gromwell 
Gromwell are plants of the genus Lithospermum of the natural order 
Boraginaceae.  
 
Grossulaceae 
Grossulaceae is a tribe of plants of the natural order Saxifragaceae. 
 
Ground Dove 
Ground Dove is a name given to several species of pigeon and especially 
the Chamoepelia of warmer parts of America. 
 
Ground Ivy 
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea) is a common British plant of the order 
Labiatae, with a creeping stem and purple flowers. It was once used as a 
flavouring in ale.  
 
Ground Squirrel 
Ground Squirrel is a a name for squirrels of the genus Tamias. They 
differ from other squirrels in posessing cheek-pouches and living in 
burrows. 
 
Ground-hog 
Ground-hog is another name for the aardvark.  
 
Ground-nut 
Ground-nut is another name for peanut.  
 
Ground-pine 
Ground-pine is a herbaceous labiate plant.  
 
Groundsel 
Groundsel (Senecio vulgaris) is a European plant of the natural order 
Compositae. The plant is emollient, has a slightly acid taste and is 
rejected by most animals except pigs and goats.  
 
Grouse 
The grouse is a fowl like bird common in north America and north Europe 
and comprising the family Tetraonidae whose distinguishing mark is a 
naked band, often of a red colour, in place of an eyebrow. They are wild, 
shy and almost untamable living in families in forests and barren regions 
and feeding on berries, buds and leaves. 
 
Growler 
The growler (Micropterus nigricans) is a fresh water fish of North 
America also called the black-bass.  
 
Growth 
Growth is the idea of an animal increasing in size, weight or complexity 
etc. 
 
Grub 
Grub is a term applied to the soft worm-like larvae of various insects. 
 
Grugru 
Grugru is the larva of the Calandra palmarum, or palm weevil found in the 
tropical parts of America. It is about the size of a thumb and is often 
cooked and eaten. 
 
Grunt 
The grunt (grunter, pig-fish, red-mouth) is an American fish of the 
family Haemulonidae which emits a grunt when taken out of the water, 
hence it's name. 
 
Grunter 
see "Grunt" 
 
Grus 
Grus is a genus of birds which includes the crane.  
 
Gryllus 
Gryllus is a genus of orthopterous insects. 
 
Grysbok 
The grysbok (grisbok, grey buck, Antilope melanotis) is a species of 
antelope found in southern Africa. It reaches a height of 1 meter in 
length and 50 cm in height at the shoulder. It is reddish-grey in colour 
and is hunted for food.  
 
Guacharo 
Guacharo (Steatornis Caripensis) is a bird of the goat-sucker family. It 
is nocturnal and a native of South America. It is the size of a common 
fowl with a curved and toothed bill and long pointed wings. Guacharo feed 
upon fruit, becoming so fat that Indians kill them for their oil. 
 
Guaiacum 
Guaiacum is a genus of plants belonging to the natural order 
Zygophyllaceae native to the West Indies and the tropical parts of 
America. They are hardwood trees and the resin of some varieties is used 
in medicine. 
 
Guan 
The guan is a gallinaceous bird of the family Cracidae, genus Penelope. 
The sides of the head and front of the throat are naked and wattled, the 
wattles being capable of inflation. The guans perch on trees descending 
in search of grain and fruits. They are native to Brazil and Guiana, and 
there was a suggestion in the 19th century of breeding them in Europe as 
poultry. 
 
Guanaco 
The guanaco is a wild member of the camel family found in South America.  
 
Guava 
Guava is the popular name of the genus Psidium, which are tropical trees 
of the natural order Myrtaceae. The fruit of the guava is high in vitamin 
C. 
 
Gudgeon 
The gudgeon is a freshwater fish found in Europe and north Asia. It 
belongs to the carp family (Cyprinidae) and has short dorsal and anal 
fins without spines. On each side of the mouth is a small barbel. 
 
Guereza 
The guereza (guerza, Colobus guerza) is an Ethiopian monkey with shirt, 
glossy black fur with long silky white fur on the flanks. 
 
Guernsey Lily 
The Guernsey Lily (Nerine Sarniensis) is a beautiful plant with purple 
red flowers and native to South Africa. It is of the family 
Amaryllidaceae. It is called the Guernsey Lily because some of its bulbs 
were washed ashore in Guernsey from a ship wreck and took root. 
 
Guerza 
see "Guereza" 
 
Guillemot 
The guillemot is a web-footed bird of the Alcidae family. The guillemot 
has a striaght, compressed and pointed bill covered with feathers as far 
as the nostrils. The wings are pointed and very short and the legs are 
short and placed far back. Guillemots eat fish and nest on sea cliffs.  
 
Guinea Pepper 
Guinea Pepper (Xylopia aromatica) is a loft tree of the custard apple 
family. Its fruit, consisting of dry carpels is used as pepper. 
 
Guinea-fowl 
The Guinea-fowl (pintado) is a genus of gallinaceous birds of the family 
Phasianidae (the pheasants). They are originally natives of Africa.  
 
Guinea-grass 
Guinea-grass is a very tall species of grass native to Africa and of the 
same genus as the millet, it grows to between 2 and 3 meters high. 
 
Guinea-pig 
The Guinea-pig is a rodent mammal of the family Cavidae (the Cavies). It 
is native to South America and rather stupid, but terribly cute and often 
kept in Europe as a children's pet. The South American Indians prefer to 
cook it roasted on a spit over an open fire and eat it. 
 
Guinea-worm 
Guinea-worm (Filaria Medinensis) is a parasitic worm of the order 
Nematoda. It is white and about the thickness of string and varies in 
length from 15 cm to 1 meter. 
 
Gull 
Gull is the general name of a family of birds distinguished by their 
straight bill, bending downwards towards the point, and marked below the 
under mandible by a triangular prominence, by their large wings, slender 
legs, palmated feet, and small hind toe. They swim well, but cannot dive.  
 
Gum-cistus 
Gum-cistus is a plant cultivated in Portugal and yielding a gum with a 
balsamic odour.  
 
Gum-tree 
Gum-tree is another name for Eucalyptus.  
 
Gunnel 
The gunnel (butterfish, Centronotus gunellus) is a fish of the Blennies 
family. The common gunnel resembles an eel and is about 10 cm long, is 
brown in colour and has black spots on the base of the dorsal fin. 
 
Gunnera 
Gunnera is a genus of plants of the bread-fruit order.  
 
Gurnard 
Gurnard or Gurnet is a popular name of acanthopterous fish of the genus 
Trigla. The head is angular and wholly covered in bony plates. The body 
is elongated, nearly round and tapering. There are two dorsal fins, the 
pectoral fins are large and the teeth are small and numerous. 
 
Guttiferae 
Guttiferae is a natural order of exogenous trees and shrubs which 
generally secrete an acrid yellow resinous juice. They are found in hot 
and humid regions, chiefly South America. 
 
Gymnoblastea 
The gymnoblastea is an order of hydrozoa. They are marine colonial forms 
in which the coenosarc is enclosed within a perisac. The perisac is not 
extended to form hydrothecae.  
 
Gynerium 
Gynerium is a genus of grass which includes Pampas Grass. 
 
Gypaetus 
Gypaetus is a genus of birds which includes the Bearded Vulture.  
 
Gypsy-wort 
Gypsy-wort is a labiate plant found in Britain in ditches and on river 
banks. It renders a dye, and gets its name from the rumour that Gypsies 
used it to darken their skin.  
 
Gyrocotyle 
Gyrocotyle is a cestoda.  
 
Hackberry 
The hackberry is an American tree of the nettle-tree family introduced 
into Britain in 1636.  
 
Haddock 
Haddock is a marine fish of the cod family found in the north atlantic. 
 
Haematopus 
Haematopus is a genus of wading birds which includes the common oyster-
catcher. 
 
Haemosporidia 
Haemosporidia is a suborder of coccidiomorpha. They are parasites which 
live in warm-blooded animals and produce various types of malaria.a 
 
Hag 
Hag is the popular name of fish of the genus Myxine. They are of worm-
like form and have no eyes or scales. The mouth is formed for suction and 
is without lips and is furnished with barbels. The hag has horny teeth 
which it uses to eat into the interior of other fish.  
 
Haliaetus 
Haliaetus is a genus of birds which includes the British white-tailed 
sea-ragle and the American bald eagle.  
 
Halibut 
Halibut is a large flatfish found in the north atlantic.  
 
Halichondria 
The halichondria is an order of sponges of the demospongia class. 
 
Haliotis 
Haliotis is a genus of gateropodous molluscs commonly called ear-shells 
or sea-ears and found adhering to rocks on the sea-shore. They are 
remarkable for the pearly iridescence of their inner surface.  
 
Halistemma 
Halistemma is a member of the order of siphonophora.  
 
Halophytes 
The Halophytes are a class of plants which inhabit salt marshes, and by 
combustion yield barilla. 
 
Haltica 
Haltica is a genus of beetle. 
 
Hamamelidaceae 
Hamamelidaceae is a small natural order of epiygynous exogenous trees or 
shrubs, varying in height from 2 to 10 meters. These are the witch-
hazels. 
 
Hammer-oyster 
The hammer-oyster is a bivalve shell fish. Malleus vulgaris, found in the 
Indian Ocean. It resembles the pearl-oyster when young, but becomes more 
hammer-like as it gets older by the lengthening of its ears. 
 
Hammerhead 
The hammerhead is a species of shark. 
 
Hamster 
The hamster (Cricetus) is a genus of rodent animals belonging to the 
Muridae (mice) family, and closely allied to the rats. They are 
distinguished by a short hairy tail and cheek pouches. 
 
Hand-plant 
The hand-plant (Cheirostemon platanoides) is a Mexican tree of the order 
Sterculiaceae. It grows to about 10 meters in height and has flowers, the 
stamen of which looks a bit like a human hand. 
 
Hard-fern 
Hard-fern is the popular name of Lomaria spicant, a common fern found 
throughout Britain growing on heaths and glens. 
 
Hare 
The hare (Lepus) is a genus of rodent with long ears, long hind legs, a 
shirt tail, soft hair and a divided upper lip. The young hare is called a 
leveret and are born in litters of between 3 and 6 leverets upto 4 times 
a year.  
 
Hare's Ear 
Hare's Ear (Bupleurum) is a plant of the natural order Umbelliferae.  
 
Harebell 
Harebell (Scotch bluebell, Campanula rotundifolia) is a plant of the 
natural order Campanulaceae with a bell shaped blue, and sometimes white 
flower. The radical leaves are cordate or reniform, the stem-leaves 
partly ovate or lanceolate. It is a slender plant growing to about 12 cm 
tall.  
 
Hareld 
The hareld (Harelda glacialis) is the long-tailed duck, an oceanic duck 
with a short thick bill, a high forehead and two very long feathers in 
the tail of the male. It inhabits the northern seas and is often found 
around Orkney and Shetland. 
 
Harlequin Duck 
The Harlequin Duck (Clangula histrionica) is a species of duck with 
white, grey and black plumage found in Arctic regions.  
 
Harp-shell 
The harp-shell is a genus of molluscs (Harpa) belonging to the 
gasteropoda and to the whelk family. The species are found around 
Mauritius. The shells are very attractive, but exposure to light causes 
their colours to fade. 
 
Harpy-eagle 
The harpy-eagle is a large, powerful bird of South America. It has a 
crooked bill, and strong sharp claws. The harpy-eagle feeds on birds, 
sloths, racoons, fawns, fish and tortoise eggs.  
 
Harrier 
The Harrier is a breed of dog intended for hare hunting. It is similar to 
the foxhound, but smaller.  
 
Hart 
Hart is the name given to a male stag.  
 
Hart's-tongue 
Hart's-tongue is a genus of highly ornamental fern with simple, undivided 
fronds. 
 
Hartebeest 
The hartebeest (Alcelaphus) is a south African antelope which measures 
about 1.5 meters high at the shoulder, has a long head, horns projecting 
outwards and backwards, black marks on the face and legs, a white mark on 
the rump and a bushy tail. They are generally found in small herds. 
 
Harvest-bug 
The harvest-bug (Leptus autumnalis) is a small larval insect of the 
family Acaridae. It is bright red in colour and about the size of a grain 
of cayenne pepper. It attacks livestock and humans, burrowing under the 
skin and so causing red pustules. 
 
Harvest-mouse 
The harvest-mouse (Musmessorius) is the smallest British quadruped. It 
builds a nest suspended amongst stalks of wheat. 
 
Harvest-spider 
The harvest-spider (Phalangium longipes) is a British spider with very 
long legs. It has a peculiar habit of throwing off one or more legs. 
 
Haustellata 
Haustellata is an extensive division of insects in which the mouth is 
furnished with a haustellum or proboscis adapted for suction. It includes 
the butterflies and moths, and two winged flies.  
 
Hawfinch 
The hawfinch is a species of grossbeak. It is one of the largest of the 
finches. It resembles the Chaffinch in colour, but is distinguished by 
its enormous beak, larger size, and bill-hook formation of some of its 
wing feathers. It feeds on all kinds of berries and is found throughout 
Britain.  
 
Hawk-moth 
The Hawk-moth is one of the sphinx moths, so called from its hovering 
motion which resembles that of a hawk.  
 
Hawkweed 
Hawkweed (Hieracium) is a genus of composite plants, sub-order 
Cichoraceae, consisting of numerous species with yellow flowers. 
 
Hawthorn 
Hawthorn (Cratoegus Oxyacantha) is a small spiny European tree, belonging 
to the sub-order Pomeae of the order Rosaceae, rising sometimes to the 
height of 6 meters. The leaves are alternate, obovate, 3 to 5 lobed. The 
flowers are white, sometimes with a reddish tinge, disposed in corymbs 
and smell rather nice. 
 
Hazel 
The hazel is a tree of the genus corylus, family corylaceae. The leaves 
are roundish-cordate, alternate and shortly petiolate. It produces nuts 
known as filberts.  
 
Hazel-grouse 
The hazel-grouse is a species of grouse inhabiting Europe and Asia. It is 
found in heathy tracts, woods and forests. It feeds on berries, buds, 
insects and worms.  
 
Heart 
The heart is a muscular organ used to maintain circulation of blood 
through an animal.  
 
Heather 
Heather is a low growing evergreen shrub that is common on sandy and acid 
soil. 
 
Hedera 
Hedera is the genus of plants to which ivy belongs. 
 
Hedge-mustard 
Hedge-mustard (Sisymbrium officinale) is a cruciferous plant once used as 
a remedy for catarrh. 
 
Hedge-sparrow 
see "Hedge-warbler" 
 
Hedge-warbler 
The hedge-warbler (hedge-sparrow, Accentor modularis) is a bird of the 
family Sylvidae, common in Britain and the temperate parts of Europe. It 
feeds on insects, worms and seeds. It grows to about 14 cm long and has 
reddish-brown plumage streaked with dark-brown. 
 
Hedgehog 
The hedgehog is a small prickly carnivorous mammal. 
 
Helamys 
Helamys is a genus of rodents allied to the jerboas. They are the 
jumping-hare or jumping-rat.  
 
Helianthemum 
Helianthemum is a genus of herbaceous undershrubs and shrubby or creeping 
plants, also known as the rock-rose genus.  
 
Helicidae 
Helicidae is the name by which the land shell-snails are distinguished. 
 
Helictis 
Helictis is a genus of carnivorous quadrupeds allied to the skunk. They 
are found in China and Nepal. 
 
Heliotrope 
Heliotrope (Heliotropium) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Boraginaceae. The species are herbs or undershrubs mostly native of the 
warmer parts of the world and have alternate leaves and small flowers 
usually disposed in scorpioid cymes.  
 
Heliozoa 
The heliozoa are an order of rhizopoda. The body is radially symetrical 
and the pseudopodia are thin and stiff. Reproduction is by fission and 
sexually by the fusion of gametes. 
 
Helix 
Helix is a genus of gasteropodous molluscs comprising the land shell-
snails.  
 
Hellebore 
Hellebore (Helleborus) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Ranunculaceae, consisting of perennial low-growing plants with palmate or 
pedate leathery leaves, yellowish, greenish or white flowers having five 
conspicuous persistent sepals and eight to ten small tubular petals.  
 
Helleborus 
see "Hellebore" 
 
Helmet-shell 
Helmet-shell is a common name for molluscs of the genus Cassis, 
gasteropods of the family Buccinidae found mainly on tropical shores. 
 
Heloderma 
Heloderma is a genus of Mexican lizard. They are about 1 meter in length 
and some are venomous. They have a thick, squat body covered with rough 
scales and form burrows under the roots of trees.  
 
Hemerobiidae 
Hemerobiidae are the lace-wing flies, a family of neuropterous insects. 
 
Hemerocallis 
Hemerocallis is a genus of Liliaceae. 
 
Hemichordata 
Hemichordata is a class of sub-phylum acrania. They are peculiar marine 
worm-like creatures.  
 
Hemidesmus 
Hemidesmus is a genus of twining plants of the natural order 
Asclepiadaceae, having opposite leaves, and cymes of small greenish 
flowers. Sarasparilla is derived from them.  
 
Hemimetabola 
Hemimetabola is the section of the insect class which undergo complete 
metamorphosis, the larva differing from the perfect insect chiefly in the 
absence of wings and size. 
 
Hemipodius 
Hemipodius is a genus of rasorial birds allied to the quail.  
 
Hemiptera 
Hemiptera is an order of four-winged insects, having a suctorial 
proboscis, the outer wings, or wing-covers, are leathery at the base and 
transparent towards the tips. 
 
Hemlock 
Hemlock (Conium maculatum) is a poisonous plant of the natural order 
Umbelliferae. It is a tall, erect, branching biennial, with a smooth, 
shining, hollow stem usually marked with purple spots. It has elegant, 
much divided leaves which when bruised emit a nauseous odour. The flowers 
are white in compound umbels of ten or more rays surrounded by a general 
involucre of three to seven leaflets.  
 
Hemp 
Hemp is an annual plant of the genus Cannabis, cultivated for its fibres 
that are used to make rope.  
 
Hemp-palm 
Hemp-palm (Chamoerops excelsa) is a Chinese and Japanese species of palm. 
Rope is made from the fibres of its leaves. 
 
Henbane 
Henbane is a plant of the genus Hyoscyamus, natural order Solanaceae. It 
is a coarse, erect biennial herb having soft, clammy, hairy foliage of a 
disagreeable odour and pale yellowish-brown flowers streaked with puple 
veins.  
 
Henna 
Henna (Lawsonia inermis) is a shrub of the natural order Lythraceae, 
bearing opposite entire leaves and numerous small white fragrant flowers 
disposed in terminal panicles.  
 
Heracleum 
Heracleum is a genus of large umbelliferous herbs, the cow-parsnips.  
 
Herb-bennet 
Herb-bennet (Benedict's herb, Avens) is an aromatic plant used as a tonic 
and astringent. 
 
Herb-robert 
Herb-robert (Geranium Robertianum) is a common British plant. It is 
astringent and aromatic.  
 
Herbaceous 
A plant said to be herbaceous is a perennial plant of which the stem 
perishes annually, while the roots remain permanent and send forth a new 
stem in the following season. 
 
Herbivore 
A herbivore is an animal that eats plants.  
 
Herbivorous 
see "herbivore" 
 
Hercules-beetle 
The Hercules-beetle (Scaraboeus) is a very large Brazilian lamellicorn 
beetle. An enormous horn projects from the head, and a smaller one from 
the thorax. The beetle grows to 12cm long. 
 
Hermaphrodite 
An hermaphrodite animal is one in which both male and female gametes are 
present. 
 
Hermit-crab 
Hermit-crab is the popular name of the Paguridae family of decapod 
crustaceans. They take posession of and occupy cast-off univalve shells 
of various molluscs, carrying this habitation about with them, and 
changing it for a larger one as they increase in size.  
 
Hernandia 
Hernandia is a genus of large Indian trees of the natural order 
Hernandiaceae. They have alternate entire leaves and flowers arranged in 
axillary or terminal spikes or corymbs.  
 
Heron 
Heron is a popular name for birds of the genus Ardea, constituting with 
the bitterns the family Ardeidae. Herons are spread over almost all the 
world. They are distinguished by having a long bill cleft beneath the 
eyes, a compressed body, long slender legs naked above the tarsal joint, 
three toes in front, the two outer united by a membrane, and by moderate 
wings. The tail is short, rounded, and composed of ten or twelve 
feathers. The common Heron is about 1 meter in length. 
 
Herring 
The herring (Clupea harengus) is an edible fish found in the north 
Atlantic. It comes close to the shore in large shoals to spawn.  
 
Hessian Fly 
The Hessian Fly (Cecidomyia destructor) is a fly of the family Tipulidae, 
of the order Diptera, the larva of which is very destructive to wheat, 
barley and rye crops.  
 
Heteropoda 
Heteropoda is an order of marine molluscs, the most highly organized of 
the Gasteropoda. In this order the foot is compressed into a vertical 
muscular lamina, serving for a fin, and the gills, when present, are 
collected into a mass on the hinder part of the back.  
 
Heteroptera 
Heteroptera is a section of hemipterous insects comprising those in which 
the two pairs of wings are of different consistence, the anterior part 
being horny or leathery, but generally tipped with membrane. They 
comprise the land and water bugs.  
 
Heterotricha 
Heterotricha is an order of ciliata vera. They are covered in cilia, and 
have a spiral band of tough cilia leading towards the cytostome. 
 
Hexactinellida 
Hexactinellida is a class of sponge with a skeleton built of six-rayed 
spicules made of silica. 
 
Hibiscus 
Hibiscus is an extensive genus of plants, natural order Malvaceae chiefly 
natives of tropical climates. They have large showy flowers, borne 
singuarly on stalks towards the ends of the branches, these flowers 
having an outer calyx of numerous leaves in addition to the true five-
lobed persistent calyx.  
 
Hickory 
Hickory is several species of timber trees of the genus Carya of the 
natural order Juglandaceae. They are natives to North America. The wood 
is heavy, strong and tenacious.  
 
Hind 
Hind is the name of a female stag or deer.  
 
Hinny 
A Hinny is a hybrid, the product of a stallion mating with a she-ass. It 
is smaller and weaker than the mule. 
 
Hippocampus 
Hippocampus (the Sea-Horse) is a genus of fish closely allied to the 
pipe-fish, of singular construction and peculiar habits. The upper parts 
look rather like a horse's head and neck in miniature. When swimming they 
maintain a vertical position. They are generally about 15cm to 25cm long 
and are found mainly in the Mediterranean and Atlantic.  
 
Hippomane 
Hippomane are a genus of plants belonging to the Euphorbiaceae. 
 
Hippopotamus 
The hippopotamus is a large herbivorous mammal found in Africa. 
 
Hirudinea 
The hirudinea are the leeches. They are an ectoparasitic class of 
annelids with few true segments but each segment shows numerous annuli. 
Suckers are present at both ends of the body. They lay eggs in cocoons 
secreted by the clitellum. 
 
Hirudo 
The hirudo are hirudinea. 
 
Hoatzin 
The hoatzin is a bird found only in the Amazon. 
 
Hog 
see "Pig" 
 
Hog-fish 
The Hog-fish are teleostean fish of the genus Scorpoena, family 
Scorpaenidae. 
 
Hog-plum 
The Hog-plum are plants of the genus Spondias, natural order 
Anacardiaceae. Some of them yield pleasant fruit. The name Hog-plum comes 
from the West Indies where the fruit was once fed to pigs (hogs).  
 
Hog-rat 
The Hog-rat (Capromys) is a genus of rodent animals of the family 
Muridae.  
 
Holcus 
Holcus is a genus of grasses, natural order Gramineae.  
 
Holly 
Holly (Ilex) is a genus of plants of the order Aquifoliaceae, embracing a 
number of evergreen trees or shrubs. The common holly is a conical 
evergreen tree growing to a height of 10 meters in Britain. It's leaves 
are dark-green, shiny and leathery, abundantly armed with prickles on the 
lower branches but free from them on the higher branches.  
 
Hollyhock 
Hollyhock is a biennial or perennial herb with tall, erect, leafy stems. 
It is native to central Europe and China. It is an important plant in 
medicine providing a dark pigment which is also used in cooking. 
 
Holm-oak 
Holm-oak (Quercus Ilex) is a shrub-like tree native to Mediterranean 
countries with holly-like leaves.  
 
Holothuria 
Holothuria is a type of holothuroidea.  
 
Holothurioidea 
Holothurioidea is an order of Echinoderms, the sea-cucumbers. 
 
Holothuroidea 
The holothuroidea are the sea cucumbers. The body is elongated and 
appears worm-like. Skeletal plates are minute and imbedded in the fleshy 
body wall. There are no spines. The mouth is at one end of the body, the 
anus at the other. Feeding is carried out by tube feet near the mouth. 
 
Holotricha 
Holotricha are an order of ciliata vera. They are covered in alike cilia. 
 
Holy Grass 
Holy Grass (Hierochloe) is an odoriferous genus of grass belonging to the 
Phalarideae.  
 
Honey-ant 
The honey-ant (Myrmecocyctus mexicnus) is a Mexican ant. They live in 
subterranean galleries and in summer some secrete a kind of honey from 
their abdomen. 
 
Honey-eater 
Honey-eater is a name given to a number of insessorial birds forming the 
family Meliphagidae, of the tribe Tenuirostres. They form a large group, 
feeding mainly on honey and the nectar of flowers. These birds are found 
in Australia and surrounding islands. They have long curved sharp bills, 
with a tongue terminating in a pencil of delicate filaments.  
 
Honey-guide 
The honey-guide is a South African cuckoo of the genus Indicator, which 
by its cries and motions directs people to the nests of wild honey bees.  
 
Honey-locust 
The Honey-locust (Gleditschia triacanthos) is an American forest tree 
belonging to the natural order Leguminosae. The leaves are pinnated, 
divided into small leaflets and the foliage has a light and elegant 
appearance.  
 
Honeysuckle 
Honeysuckle (Woodbine) is the Lonicera genus of Linnaeus of the natural 
order Caprifoliaceae. It is a twining shrub with distinct leaves and red 
berries found in Britain.  
 
Hooded Seal 
The hooded seal (Cystophora cristata) is a species of seal, the male of 
which has a movable, inflatable muscular bag stretching from the muzzle 
to behind the eyes. The prevailing colour is black. 
 
Hoof 
A hoof is the horny casing of the foot of a ruminant, horse, swine or 
similar animals.  
 
Hoofed 
Hoofed is the term applied to animals with hooves.  
 
Hoopoe 
The hoopoe (Upupa) is a bird about 30cm long with a fine crest of pale 
cinnamon-red feathers tipped with black. It is a ground feeder eating 
mainly insects.  
 
Hooves 
Hooves is the plural of hoof. 
 
Hop 
The hop is a plant of the family cannabiaceae. The root is perennial 
giving out several herbaceous, rough, twining stems with large lobed 
leaves. The catkins are added to beer to give it flavour. 
 
Hop-clover 
Hop-clover (Trifolium procumbens) is a plant of the order Leguminosae, 
distinguished from other species of clover by its bunch of yellow flowers 
which wither to brown. 
 
Hops 
Hops are the dried flowers of the hop plant.  
 
Horehound 
Horehound (Marrubium vulgare) is a labiate plant with whitish, downy 
leaves and stem. The flowers are small, nearly white in crowded whorls. 
The flowers are aromatic and have a bitter taste. An infusion of 
horehound was a popular English remedy for coughs and colds.  
 
Hormiphora 
The hormiphora is a member of the sub-phylum ctenophora family. 
 
Hornbills 
The Hornbills (Bucerotidoe) are a remarkable group of birds found in 
southern Asia and Africa. They are akin to the Toucans and Kingfishers. 
The hornbills are remarkable for the size of their bill and a horny 
protruberance which surmounts the bill.  
 
Horned pheasant 
see "Tragopan" 
 
Horned Ray 
see "Cephaloptera" 
 
Horned Viper 
see "Cerastes" 
 
Horned-screamer 
The horned-screamer (Palamedea cornuta) is a South American grallatorial 
bird having a long, slender, movable horn projecting from its forehead. 
It has a loud and shrill voice.  
 
Horned-toad 
Horned-toad is a popular name for the Phrynosoma genus of lizards. They 
are found in America and look rather like toads and are covered with 
spine-like scales. 
 
Hornet 
The hornet is an insect of the genus Vespa, much larger and stronger than 
the ordinary wasp. Hornets are voracious, feeding on fruit and honey and 
preying on other insects. The nest is formed in hollow-trees and walls. 
The hornet sting is very painful and usually causes considerable 
swelling. 
 
Horse 
The horse is a hoofed, odd toed grass eating mammal.  
 
Horse Chestnut 
Horse Chestnut is a tall deciduous tree native to south-eastern Europe. 
The fruit is a green spiny capsule containing one or more hard brown 
seeds known as "conkers".  
 
Horse-fly 
The Horse-fly is a winged insect of the family Hippoboscidae which is 
parasitic on the horse. 
 
Horse-radish 
Horse-radish (Cochlearia Armoracia) is a cruciferous plant found in the 
temperate parts of Europe in moist locations. The root is cylindrical, 
whitish in colour and forms a popular condiment. It is a pungent tasting 
and smelling root, excellent with roast beef. 
 
Horse-tail 
Horse-tail is a popular name for plants of the genus Equisetum of the 
natural order Equisetaceae. The cuticle abounds in siliceous cells, a 
property which allows the horse-tail to be used for polishing wood. 
 
Horseradish 
Horseradish is a cruciferae native to south east Europe. The root is used 
in cookery as a condiment of beef.  
 
Hound 
A hound is a hunting dog which hunts by scent. There are several 
varieties; bloodhound, staghound, foxhound, harrier and beagle.  
 
Houseleek 
The Houseleek (Sempervivum tectorum) is a succulent plant of the natural 
order Crassulaceae. It grows on old walls and roofs. The stem reaches 
about 20cm in length and bears a few purplish flowers which have twelve 
or fifteen petals. 
 
Howler Monkey 
The Howler Monkey (Mycetes) is a genus of South American monkey 
characterized by a remarkable loudness of voice. They are prehensile, 
tailed, large and heavy of body with a high pyramidal head flattened on 
the summit. 
 
Hoya 
Hoya is a genus of Asclepiadaceae common in tropical Asia.  
 
Huia-bird 
Huia-bird is a Maori name for New Zealand's starlings.  
 
Human 
A human is an animal of the genus homo. 
 
Humming-bird 
Humming-bird is the popular name for the Trochilidae family of munte and 
beautiful birds, so called from the sound of their wings in flight. The 
beak is slender, generally long, sometimes straight and sometimes curved. 
The tongue is long and filiform. They feed by hovering by a plant and use 
their tongue to catch insects. 
 
Huon Pine 
The Huon Pine is a tree of the Yew family found in Tasmania and yielding 
a useful timber. 
 
Hura 
Hura is a genus of tropical American plants of the natural order 
Euphorbiaceae. 
 
Hurgila 
see "Adjutant-bird" 
 
Hyacinth 
Hyacinth is a genus of liliaceous bulbous plants including about thirty 
species.  
 
Hyalonema 
The hyalonema is a member of the hexactinellida class.  
 
Hydatina 
Hydatina is a phylum rotifera.  
 
Hydra 
The hydra is of the order hydrida.  
 
Hydrangea 
Hydrangea is a genus of shrubs or herbs of the natural order 
Saxifragaceae, containing about thirty-three species native to Asia and 
America. The British garden hydrangea was introduced from China in 1790 
by Sir J. Banks. 
 
Hydrida 
Hydrida is an order of hydrozoa. They are solitary hydroid freshwater 
forms which reproduce by budding and sexual reproduction. 
 
Hydrozoa 
Hydrozoa is a class of sub-phylum cnidaria. They are mainly marine 
colonial forms which during the life-history have both hydroid and 
medusoid stages.  
 
Hyena 
The hyena is a carnivorous mammal found in Africa and Asia. 
 
Hymenoptera 
The hymenoptera is an order of insects which includes the bees, wasps and 
ants. 
 
Hypericaceae 
Hypericaceae is a natural order of plants. They are herbs, shrubs or 
rarely trees with simple opposite leaves. They have terminal or axillary, 
solitary, cymose or paniculate flowers which are usually yellow or white.  
 
Hypermastigina 
Hypermastigina are an order of zoomastigina. They are small flagellates 
with numerous flagella. They live in the gut of insects. Hypermastigina 
in the gut of termites assist in the digestion of wood. 
 
Hypotricha 
Hypotricha is an order of ciliata vera. They are flattened ciliates with 
large stiff ciliates on the lower surface which act similarly to legs. 
 
Hyracoidea 
The hyracoidea are an order of eutheria. They are small rabbit-like 
creatures.  
 
Hyssop 
Hyssop is an aromatic herb of the family labiatae.  
 
Ibex 
The ibex is a wild goat.  
 
Iguana 
The iguana is a type of lizard. 
 
Iguanodon 
Iguanodon was a herbivore dinosaur of the cretaceous period. For defence 
it had a 40cm long sharp thumb spike. Iguanodon lived in herds.  
 
Ilex 
see "Holl" 
 
Impala 
The impala is an African antelope.  
 
Impatiens 
The impatiens are a genus of plants with elastic valves of the seed-pod 
which discharge the seeds when ripe or when touched.  
 
Impennes 
Impennes is a name given to swimming birds which have only rudimentary 
feathers, such as penguins.  
 
Impey Pheasant 
The Impey Pheasant (Monaul, Lophophorus refulgens) is a bird of the 
pheasant family with splendid plumage found in the higher regions of the 
Himalayas. It is the size of a small turkey. 
 
Inaja Palm 
The Inaja Palm is a South American palm growing to heights of over 30 
meters with leaves 10 to 12 meters long.  
 
Indian millet 
Indian millet (Sorghum vulgare) is a grass of the genus Sorghum.  
 
Indian Shot 
Indian Shot (Canna indica) is an ornamental plant of the Arrow-root 
family found in most tropical countries. The seeds are round, black and 
hard, hence the name Indian Shot. 
 
Indigo-bird 
The Indigo-bird (Cyanospiza cyanea) is a North American bird of the Finch 
family. It is a deep-blue colour and a good songster. 
 
Indigofera 
Indigofera is a genus of plants, the Indigo plants. They are herbaceous 
or shrubby plants with pinnate leaves and small, blue, purple or white 
pea shaped flowers disposed in axillary racemes. The dye Indigo was 
formerly obtained from the leaves of the plant by fermentation.  
 
Infusoria 
Infusoria is a class of minute animals. They are provided with a mouth, 
are without pseudopodia, and are furnished with vibratile cilia.  
 
Ingested 
see "ingestion" 
 
Ingestion 
Ingestion is the process of getting food within the confines of the body. 
 
Insect 
see "insecta" 
 
Insecta 
Insecta is the insect class of arthropods. The body is divided into; 
head, thorax and abdomen. When wings are present they arise from the 
second and third thoracic segments. There are three thoracic segments 
each with a pair of walking legs. 
 
Insectivora 
Insectivora is an order of small eutheria which eat insects. The teeth 
are small and have pointed cusps.  
 
Insectivore 
An insectivore is a mammal which feeds predominantly on insects.  
 
Insectivorous 
see "insectivore" 
 
Insects 
see "insect" 
 
Intestine 
The intestine is the longest part of the alimentary canal. It follows the 
stomach. The intestine is divided into parts. 
 
Invertebrate 
An invertebrate is an animal without a backbone.  
 
Ipomoea 
The ipomoea is a genus of twining tropical plant which includes the sweet 
potato. 
 
Isopoda 
Isopoda is an order of malacostraca where the carapace is absent and the 
body is flattened dorsoventrally. The abdomen is often reduced. The 
endopodites of the abdominal appendages function as gills. 
 
Ivory 
Ivory is a hard white substance of which some animals teeth and tusks are 
composed. 
 
Jacaranda 
The jacaranda is a genus of American tropical ornamental trees. 
 
Jack-in-the-box 
Jack-in-the-box (Hernandia Sonora) is a tree of the Hernandia genus. It 
is so named because of the noise the wind makes whistling through its 
persistent involucels.  
 
Jackal 
The jackal is a carnivorous member of the dog family. 
 
Jaguar 
The jaguar is a large carnivorous mammal of the cat family. 
 
Jasmine 
Jasmine is a plant of the oleaceae family.  
 
Jay 
The jay is a bird of the crow family. 
 
Juniper 
Juniper is an evergreen shrub of the genus Juniperus. Juniper has prickly 
leaves and dark purple berries of a pungent taste. The juice of the 
berries is extracted and used as a diuretic and flavouring in gin etc.  
 
Kale 
Kale is a type of cabbage.  
 
Kangaroo 
The kangaroo is a marsupial mammal found in Australia.  
 
Kauri pine 
The Kauri pine is one of the dammar pine family of trees. It is found in 
the north island of New Zealand where it grows to 160 feet in height.  
 
Keaki 
The keaki is a Japanese tree. 
 
Kestrel 
The kestrel is a British bird of the falcon family. 
 
Kidney Bean 
see "French_Beans" 
 
Kinglet 
see "Golden-crested_Wren" 
 
Kite 
The kite is a bird of prey of the falcon family.  
 
Kiwi 
The kiwi is a group of three species of bird only found in New Zealand. 
They are about the size of a domestic fowl, have short stout legs 
terminated in four toes and a long bill with nostrils at the tip. 
 
Knapweed 
Knapweed is a plant of the genus Centaurea. 
 
Koala 
The koala is a marsupial found only in east Australia.  
 
Krill 
Krill is a malacostraca.  
 
Kudu 
The kudu is a breed of antelope. It is found in Africa. The males have 
twisted horns up to 60 inches long, and stand about 6 feet tall at the 
shoulder and weigh around 700 pounds. The females are hornless. 
 
Laburnum 
Laburnum is a small leguminous tree of the genus Laburnum with poisonous 
seeds and bright yellow flowers. 
 
Lacertilia 
Lacertilia is a suborder of squamata. These are the lizards. Limbs are 
usually present, and traces of a girdle are always present, even in the 
limbless species.  
 
Ladybird 
The ladybird is a beetle of the family coccinellidae. 
 
Lagomorpha 
Lagomorpha are the rabbit order of eutheria. They have a second pair of 
upper incisors immediately behind the first pair. 
 
Lamb's-Lettuce 
see "Corn_Salad" 
 
Lamellibranchiata 
Lamellibranchiata is a class of phylum mollusca. They are the mussels, 
oysters, scallops etc. The head is reduced and the mantle encloses the 
body and secretes a bivalved shell. 
 
Lamprey 
The lamprey is a member of the cyclostomi subclass. 
 
Lamp shell 
see "phylum_brachiopoda" 
 
Landrail 
see "Corn-crake" 
 
Langur 
The langur is a leaf eating monkey found in south Asia. 
 
Lapwing 
The lapwing is a British bird of the plover family. 
 
Larch 
The larch is a tree of the pinaceae family. 
 
Lavender 
Lavender is a herb of the family labiatae.  
 
Leek 
The leek is a liliaceae.  
 
Leguminosae 
The leguminosae family of plants have pods containing dry fruits and 
nitrogen rich roots. 
 
Leguminous 
see "Leguminosa" 
 
Lemur 
Lemurs are species of omnivorous forest dwelling primates found in 
Madagascar and the Comoro Islands. They have large eyes and bushy tails. 
 
Lemuroidea 
The lemuroidea is an order of eutheria. They are related to the monkeys, 
but are more primitive. They are adpated to arboreal life. 
 
Lemurs 
see "lemur" 
 
Lentil 
The lentil is an annual plant of the legumionsae family.  
 
Leopard 
The leopard is a member of the cat family.  
 
Lepismidae 
Lepismidae is a family of minute wingless insects of the order Thysanura, 
having the abdomen furnished at its extremity with three caudal bristles 
which are used in leaping. 
 
Leptoplana 
Leptoplana is a member of the order polycladida.  
 
Leptostraca 
Leptostraca is a marine order of malacostraca. The carapace takes the 
form of a bivalved shell. In the front of the head region is a movable 
head plate.  
 
Lesothosaurus 
Lesothosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur from the triassic era. It was a 
small dinosaur, about 1m long with a long tail.  
 
Liliaceae 
The liliaceae is the lilly family. They are stemless plants, with a 
simple or branched trunk, and have bulbous or fascicled roots.  
 
Lillies 
see "lilly" 
 
Lilly 
A lilly is a liliaceae  
 
Linaceae 
Linaceae is the flax family, a small natural order of exogenous plants. 
they are principally characterized by their regular flowers, with 
imbricate glandular sepals having a disc of five glands outside the 
satminal tube.  
 
Lineus 
Lineus is a nemertea. 
 
Lingula 
Lingula is a phylum brachiopoda.  
 
Linnet 
The linnet is a bird of the finch family. 
 
Linum 
Linum is the flax genus of plants which gives its name to the natural 
order Linaceae. There are about 80 species, herbs or rarely small shrubs, 
chiefly found in the temperate and warmer extra-tropical regions of both 
hemispheres. 
 
Lion 
The lion is a member of the cat family panthera leo. They are now only 
found in Africa and in north west India. The male lion has a heavy mane 
and a tuft at the end of the tail. 
 
Liquorice 
Liquorice is a perennial herb of the leguminosae family and found in 
Europe.  
 
Lizard 
The lizards are reptiles. 
 
Lizards 
see "lizard" 
 
Loa 
The loa is a genus of parasitic nematode. 
 
Loach 
The loach is a carp like fresh water fish.  
 
Lobster 
The lobster is a malacostraca.  
 
Locomotion 
Locomotion is the idea of movement from one place to another. 
 
Lotus 
Lotus is a genus of plant of the legumionosae family. 
 
Lumbricus 
The lumbricus are oligochaeta.  
 
Lung fish 
see "crossopterygii" 
 
Lung fishes 
see "lung_fish" 
 
Lynx 
The lynx is a member of the cat family found in rocky and forested areas 
of north America and Europe. 
 
Mackerel 
The mackerel is a pelagic fish found in the north atlantic and 
mediterranean. 
 
Madrepora 
Madrepora is a member of the order zoantharia.  
 
Magpie 
The magpie is a bird of the crow family.  
 
Malacostraca 
Malacostraca is a subclass of crustacea. The eyes are usually stalked. 
Typically the carapace covers the thorax which consists of eight 
segments. The abdomen is made up of six appendage-bearing segments. 
 
Mallard 
The mallard is a British duck.  
 
Mallow 
Mallow is a wild plant of the genus Malva with hairy leaves and stem and 
rose-purple flowers. 
 
Malvaceae 
Malvaceae is a large natural order of exogenous plants (the mallows), 
having polypetalous flowers, monadelphous stamens, unilocular anthers, 
valvate estivation and often an external calyx.  
 
Mammal 
see "mammalia" 
 
Mammalia 
Mammalia is the mammal class of craniates. The young are nourished by 
milk. The skin is covered in two types of glands: sweat glands and 
sebaceous glands. The sweat glands secrete a watery fluid to assist body 
cooling. The sebaceous glands secrete an oily fluid to maintain water 
resistance in the hair. The heart has two auricles and two ventricles.  
 
Mammals 
see "mammal" 
 
Manatee 
A manatee is a herbivorous marine mammal. 
 
Mandasuchus 
Mandasuchus was a carnivorous reptile from the triassic era. It was the 
size of a car.  
 
Mango 
The mango is a tree native to India but found in warm climates. 
 
Maple 
The maple is a deciduous tree of some 200 species.  
 
Mare 
A mare is a female horse. 
 
Margay 
The margay is a small wild cat. 
 
Markhor 
The markhor is a large wild goat found in the himalayas.  
 
Marshmallow 
Marshmallow is a perennial herb of the order Malvaceae, with a yellow, 
branched root, tall, erect, leafy stems and large alternate, lobed and 
irregularly toothed leaves. The root can be boiled and eaten as a 
vegetable.  
 
Marsupial 
see "metatheria" 
 
Marsupials 
see "marsupial" 
 
Marten 
The marten is a carnivorous mammal of the genus Martes. It resembles a 
large weasel and has valuable fur. 
 
Massospondylus 
Massospondylus was one of the earliest dinosaurs. It lived during the 
triassic era. It was an omnivore with a latge bulky body and a tiny head. 
It grew to about 6m long. It had a strange thumb claw which could have 
been used for defense and also digging.  
 
Mastigophora 
The mastigophora are a class of phylum protozoa. They are small protozoa 
which are motile in the adult stage, swimming by means of flagella. They 
reproduce by logitudinal fission. 
 
Matamata 
The matamata is a south American fresh water turtle.  
 
Medusae 
see "scyphozoa" 
 
Medusidae 
see "scyphozoa" 
 
Megalornithidae 
see "Crane" 
 
Megalosaurus 
Megalosaurus was a large carnivorous dinosaur from the jurrasic period. 
Remains have been found in oxfordshire, england. It was estimated to be 
about the size of two cars. 
 
Merino 
The merino is a type of sheep with fine silky wool. 
 
Merocystis 
Merocystis is a member of the coccidia vera order.  
 
Mesostoma 
Mesostoma is a member of the order rhabdocoelida. 
 
Metatheria 
Metatheria is a subclass of mammal. These are the marsupials. The young 
are born in an immature state and migrate into a pouch on the mother's 
abdomen where they are nourished on milk.  
 
Mezereon 
Mezereon is a deciduous shrub with fragrant purple flowers. 
 
Mignonette 
Mignonette (Reseda odorata) is a plant with fragrant greyish-green 
blossoms.  
 
Mildew 
Mildew is a growth of minute white fungi. It occurs on plants and objects 
exposed to damp.  
 
Milfoil 
Milfoil is another name for Yarrow. 
 
Milk 
Milk is a secretion of modified skin glands of female mammals.  
 
Millepede 
A millepede is a myriapod with numerous legs placed one each of the 
segments in double pairs. 
  
 
Millepora 
Millepora is a member of the order milleporina. 
 
Milleporina 
Milleporina is an order of marine hydrozoa with the hydroid colony on the 
surface of a massive calcareous corallum perforated by pores into which 
the polyps can be retracted.  
 
Millet 
Millet is the name of several grasses of the genus Sorghum. 
 
Mimosa 
Mimosa is a genus of leguminous plants, sub-division of Mimoseae. 
 
Mimusops 
Mimusops is a genus of large, milky-juiced tropical trees.  
 
Mina Bird 
The Indian Mina Brid is a deep velvet black bird with a whitespot on the 
wing. A member of the genus Grakle, the Mina Bird can imitate the human 
voice and be taught tricks.  
 
Mink 
The mink is 2 species of carnivorous mammal of the weasel family. It is 
semi-aquatic, burrowing on the banks of rivers and ponds and eating frogs 
and fish. 
 
Minnow 
The minnow (Leuciscus phoxinus) is a species of fish of the carp family. 
They rarely grow longer than 7cm and are often used as bait for catching 
trout.  
 
Mint 
Mint is the name given to several herbaceous aromatic plants of the genus 
Mentha, natural order Labiatae. They are nearly all perennial, having 
square stems which bear opposite and simple leaves. 
 
Mirabilis 
Mirabilis is a genus of plants of the natural order Nyctagineae.  
 
Mistletoe 
Mistletoe is a European plant of the order Loranthaceae which grow 
parasitically on various trees. It was sacred to the Druids, especially 
when it was found growing on the oak tree. It is a small shrub with 
sessile, rectangular, leathery leaves and small yellowish-green flowers. 
In winter the bush is covered in white berries. 
 
Mite 
see "acarina" 
 
Mitre 
Mitre is a name given to many molluscs which inhabit a small and pretty 
turreted shell found in the seas around hot climates. 
 
Moccasin Snake 
The Moccasin Snake is a very venomous snake found in swamps in the warmer 
parts of America. It grows to around 60 cm in length, is dark brown above 
and grey underneath.  
 
Mocking-bird 
The mocking-bird is an American bird of the thrush family. It is renowned 
for being able to immitate the calls of most animals. 
 
Mockingbird 
The mockingbird is a North American songbird (Mimus polyglottos) of the 
mimic thrush family Mimidae, found in the USA and Mexico. About 25 cm 
long, it is brownish grey, with white markings on the black wings and 
tail. It is remarkable for its ability to mimic the songs of other 
species. 
 
Mole 
The mole is a burrowing mammal of the talpidae family.  
 
Mole-rat 
The mole-rat is a rodent of the genus Spalax, family Spalacidae. They are 
dumpish, stout-bodied rodents with short strong limbs and a very short 
tail.  
 
Mollusc 
see "phylum_mollusca" 
 
Mollusca 
see "phylum_mollusca" 
 
Molluscoida 
Molluscoida is a group of animals comprising the Polyzoa, Tunicata and 
Brachiopoda. The nervous system consists of a single ganglion or a 
principal pair of ganglia and the heart is imperfect. 
 
Molluscs 
see "phylum_mollusca" 
 
Moloch Lizard 
The moloch lizard is a genus of ferocious looking, but harmless lizards 
of Australia. It has a horned head and spiny body.  
 
Monaul 
see "Impey_Pheasant" 
 
Mongoose 
The mongoose is a small carnivorous mammal that is often kept for its 
ability to kill snakes. 
 
Monitor 
The monitor is any of various lizards of the family Varanidae, found in 
Africa, South Asia, and Australasia. Monitors are generally large and 
carnivorous, with well-developed legs and claws and a long powerful tail 
that can be swung in defence. Monitors include the Komodo dragon, the 
largest of all lizards, and also the slimmer Salvador's monitor Varanus 
salvadorii, which may reach 2.5m. Several other monitors, such as the 
lace monitor (Varanus varius), the perentie Varanus giganteus of 
Australia, and the Nile monitor (Varanus niloticus) of Africa, are up to 
2m long. 
 
Monkey 
A monkey is a small, usually tree dwelling, primate.  
 
Monkey puzzle 
The monkey puzzle is a tree from the southern Andes.  
 
Monkey-pot tree 
The Monkey-pot tree (Lecythis Ollaria) is a large forest tree of Brazil.  
 
Monkeys 
see "monkey" 
 
Monkshood 
see "Aconite" 
 
Monocystis 
Monocystis is a member of the gregarinida order.  
 
Monogenea 
Monogenea is an order of trematoda. They are ectoparasitic flukes with 
relatively simple life histories which do not involve an intermediate 
host. They feed on aquatic animals. Both hooks and suckers are present.  
 
Monotremata 
The monotremata is a subclass of mammals. They lay large eggs. There are 
no mammae, but the young are nourished by a secretion poured into a 
depression in the abdomen. 
 
Monotreme 
Monotreme refers to any member of the order Monotremata, the only living 
egg-laying mammals, found in Australasia. They include the echidnas and 
the platypus.  
 
Moorhen 
The moorhen is a British water bird.  
 
Moose 
The moose is a large deer (Alces alces) inhabiting northern Asia and 
northern Europe, where it is known as the elk. It is brown in colour, 
stands about 2m at the shoulders, and has very large palmate antlers, a 
fleshy muzzle, a short neck, and long legs. It feeds on leaves and 
shoots. 
 
Morgan horse 
The Morgan horse is a breed of riding and driving show horse originating 
in the USA in the 1780s from a single stallion named Justin Morgan after 
his owner. They are marked by high, curved necks and high stepping 
action. The breed is valued for its strength, endurance, and speed.  
 
Morphology 
Morphology is the study of animal form. 
 
Mosquito 
Mosquito is a term applied to any fly of the family Culicidae. The female 
mosquito has needle-like mouth-parts and sucks blood before laying eggs. 
Males feed on plant juices. Some mosquitoes carry diseases such as 
malaria. Human odour in general is attractive to mosquitoes, also lactic 
acid in sweat and heat at close range. Peoples' varying reactions to 
mosquito bites depend on the general allergic reaction and not on the 
degree of the bite; the allergic reaction is caused by the saliva 
injected from the mosquito's salivary glands to prevent coagulation of 
the host's blood. Natural mosquito repellents include lavender oil, 
citronella (from lemon grass), thyme, and eucalyptus oils. 
 
Moth 
The moth is an insect family, being one of the order of lepidoptera.  
 
Mouflon 
The mouflon is a sheep (Ovis ammon) found wild in Cyprus, Corsica, and 
Sardinia. It has woolly under-fur in winter, but this is covered by heavy 
guard hairs. The coat is brown with white belly and rump. Males have 
strong, curving horns. The mouflon lives in mountain areas. 
 
Mouse 
Mouse is a general term applied to small rodents, particularly those of 
the muridae family. 
 
Mousebird 
The mousebird is a bird of the order Coliiformes, including a single 
family (Coliidae) of small crested species peculiar to Africa. They have 
hair-like feathers, long tails, and mouse-like agility. The largest is 
the blue-naped mousebird Colius macrourus, about 35cm long.  
 
Mudnester 
The mudnester is any of an Australian group of birds that make their 
nests from mud, including the apostle bird (Struthidea cinerea), the 
white-winged chough (Corcorax melanorhamphos), and the magpie lark 
(Grallina cyanoleuca). 
 
Mudpuppy 
The mudpuppy is a brownish salamander of the genus Necturus in the family 
Proteidae. There are five species, living in fresh water in North 
America. They all breathe in water using external gills. Necturus 
maculatus is about 20cm long. Mudpuppies eat fish, snails, and other 
invertebrates. 
 
Mudskipper 
The mudskipper is a fish of the goby family, genus Periophthalmus, found 
in brackish water and shores in the tropics, except for the Americas. It 
can walk or climb over mudflats, using its strong pectoral fins as legs, 
and has eyes set close together on top of the head. It grows up to 30cm 
long.  
 
Mulberry 
The mulberry is a group of trees of the genus morus and family moraceae.  
 
Mule 
The mule is a hybrid animal, the result of an ass and a mare breeding.  
 
Mullein 
Mullein (Verbascum Thapsus) is a plant of the natural order 
Scrophulariaceae. It is a tall rough plant with yellow flowers which are 
almost sessile and are disposed in a long cylindrical spike. 
 
Mullet 
The mullet is two groups of acanthopterygian fish, the grey mullets 
(Mugilidae) and the red mullets (Mullidae). 
 
Mungoose 
Mungoose is an alternative 19th century spelling of Mongoose. 
 
Muntjac 
The muntjac is a small deer found in south east Asia. 
 
Muraena 
Muraena is a genus of adopal malacopterygious fish of the family 
Muraenidae. They resemble the eels in form having no pectoral fins, and 
the dorsal and anal fins are very low and are united.  
 
Murex 
Murex is a genus of gasteropod molluscs resembling the whelk. They have a 
spiral shell, rough with three or more ranges of spines simple or 
branched. 
 
Murices 
Murices is the plural form of Murex.  
 
Muridae 
Muridae is the family of animals which includes the mice and rats.  
 
Murry 
Murry (Muraena helena) is a Mediterranean fish of the genus Muraena. It 
grows to 150cm long and is considered good eating.  
 
Musaceae 
Musaceae is a natural order of endogenous plants. The order includes the 
banana, plantain and abaca.  
 
Muscidae 
Muscidae is a family of two-winged flies which includes the common house-
fly. 
 
Mushroom 
Mushroom is the popular name for numerous cryptogamic plants of the 
natural order Fungi. Some are edible and others are toxic.  
 
Musk 
Musk is a perennial plant Mimulus moschatus of the family 
Scrophulariaceae. It has small rectangular leaves which excrete a scent 
from which it takes its name. 
 
Musk-deer 
Musk-deer is a genus of deer forming the family Moschidae. They are not 
true deer, and are found primarily in Asia. The male Musk-deer yields 
musk, which is secreted from an abdominal gland.  
 
Musk-duck 
The Musk-duck (Cairina moschata) is a native American duck. 
 
Musk-mallow 
Musk-mallow (Malva moschata) is a British perennial plant.  
 
Musk-ox 
The musk-ox (Ovibos moschatus) is an animal intermediate between an ox 
and a sheep. It resembles a large goat-like sheep, its body is covered 
with a coat of thick, tufted brown hair. It is an active and agile animal 
found in mountainous regions of Arctic America. 
 
Musk-rat 
The Musk-rat (Fiber zibethicus) or musquash, is an American rodent allied 
to the beaver. It is about the size of a small rabbit, with a flattened 
lanceolate tail, and is covered with small scales and a few hairs.  
 
Muskrat 
The muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus) is a rodent of the family Cricetidae, 
about 30cm long, living along streams, rivers, and lakes in North 
America. It has webbed hind feet, a side-to-side flattened tail, and 
shiny, light-brown fur. It builds up a store of food, plastering it over 
with mud, for winter consumption. It is hunted for its fur.  
 
Musquash 
see "Musk-rat" 
 
Mussel 
Mussel is a term popularly given to several lamellibranchiate molluscs of 
the section Asiphonida. 
 
Mustang 
The mustang is a small wild horse found in south west USA and north 
Mexico. 
 
Mustard 
Mustard is an annual plant of the cruciferae family.  
 
Mustela 
Mustela is the weasel genus of carnivorous animals. 
 
Mycelium 
Mycelium is an interwoven mass of threadlike filaments which form the 
main body of most fungi.  
 
Mycetes 
see "Howler_Monkey" 
 
Mycetozoa 
The mycetozoa are an order of rhizopoda. They are slime fungi which form 
encrusting masses on rotten wood. Reproduction occurs by fission and the 
formation of spores out of which hatch amoebae. 
 
Mygale 
Mygale is a genus of spiders of the family Mygalidae. They are furnished 
with four pulmonary sacs and spiracles, four spinnerets, eight eyes, and 
hairy legs. 
 
Mylabris 
Mylabris is a genus of coleopterous insects.  
 
Mylodon 
The mylodon is a genus of extinct edentate mammalia. Their remains have 
been found in South America. It was a herbivore terrestial animal.  
 
Myosotis 
Myosotis is a genus of plants belonging to the Boraginaceae.  
 
Myoxus 
Myoxus is the dormouse genus of animals.  
 
Myriapoda 
Myriapoda is a class of arthropod with a clearly demarcated head region.  
 
Myristica 
Myristica is the genus of the natural order Myristicaceae.  
 
Myrtle 
The myrtle is an evergreen shrub of the genus myrtus and family 
myrtaceae.  
 
Mysidacea 
Mysidacea is an order of malacostraca in which the thorax is covered by 
the carapace and the exopodite of the antenna is scale-like. The abdomen 
terminates in a tail fan.  
 
Myxine 
see "Hag" 
 
Narcissus 
The narcissus is a genus of bulbous plants. 
 
Narwhal 
The narwhal is a whale found only in the arctic.  
 
Nautilus 
The nautilus is a shelled cephalopod of the genus Nautilus, found in the 
Indian and Pacific oceans. The pearly nautilus (Nautilus pompilius) has a 
chambered spiral shell about 20cm in diameter. Its body occupies the 
outer chamber. The nautilus has a large number of short, grasping 
tentacles surrounding a sharp beak.  
The living nautiluses are representatives of a group common 450 million 
years ago.   
 
Nectar 
Nectar is a sugary liquid secreted by some plants.  
 
Nematode 
The nematodes are a group of worms which have an unsegmented cylindrical 
body which tapers at both ends.  
 
Nemertea 
The nemertea are the proboscis worms. They are triploblastic animals with 
a very extensible body. Both a mouth and anus are present. A simple blood 
vascular system is present. The excretory system is a flame-bulb system.  
 
Neornithes 
The neornithes are a subclass of bird. The metarcarpals are fused, and 
the tail is short. Teeth are absent. 
 
Neosporidia 
Neosporidia is a subclass of sporozoa. They are obscure sporozoans. 
 
Nereis 
Nereis are polychaeta.  
 
Nettle 
The nettle is a plant of the family urticaceae. 
 
Neurone 
A neurone is a cell which receives and transmits electrical impulses. 
Neurones are the basic component of an animal's nervous system. 
 
Newt 
The newt is an urodela. 
 
Nicotiana 
Nicotiana is the tobacco genus of plants. 
 
Nightingale 
The nightingale is a song bird of the thrush family.  
 
Nightjar 
The nightjar is any of about 65 species of night-hunting birds forming 
the family Caprimulgidae. They have wide, bristly mouths for catching 
flying insects. Their distinctive calls have earned them such names as 
whippoorwill and church-will's-widow. Some are called 
 
Nilgai 
The nilgai is a large, short horned Indian antelope.  
 
Notochord 
A notochord is an axial stiffening rod extending along the length of an 
animal and lying immediately above the alimentary canal.  
 
Nutcracker 
The nutcracker is a bird of the crow family.  
 
Nuthatch 
The nuthatch is a small bird of the family Sittidae, with a short tail 
and pointed beak. Nuthatches climb head first up, down, and around tree 
trunks and branches, foraging for insects and their larvae.  
The 14 cm long white-breasted nuthatch Sitta carolinensis of North 
America has a black cap, grey wings, and white under-parts.  
 
Nutmeg 
Nutmeg is a tree. The nut of the nutmeg is used in cooking as a spice.  
 
Nutria 
The nutria or coypu is a  South American water rodent (Myocastor coypus), 
it is about 60 cm long and weighs up to 9kg. It has a scaly, rat-like 
tail, webbed hind feet, a blunt, muzzled head, and large, orange 
incisors. The fur is reddish brown. It feeds on vegetation and lives in 
burrows in river and lake banks.  
Taken to Europe and then to North America to be farmed for their fur, 
many escaped or were released and became established, often to the 
detriment of native species.  
 
Nutrition 
Nutrition is the process of taking in food and obtaining energy and vital 
substances from it. 
 
Nyala 
The nyala (Tragelaphus angasi) is an antelope found in the thick bush of 
southern Africa. About 1 m at the shoulder, it is greyish-brown with thin 
vertical white stripes. Males have horns up to 80cm long.  
 
Oak 
The oak is a tree of the family fagaceae. 
 
Oarfish 
The oarfish are any of a family Regalecidae of deep-sea bony fishes, 
found in warm parts of the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. Oarfish 
are large, up to 9m long, elongated, and compressed, with a fin along the 
back and a manelike crest behind the head. They have a small mouth, no 
teeth or scales, and large eyes. They are often reported as sea serpents.  
 
Obelia 
Obelia is a member of the order of calyptoblastea.  
 
Ocelot 
The ocelot is a wild cat found in central and south America.  
 
Ochro 
see "Abelmoschus" 
 
Octobothrium 
Octobothrium is a member of the order monogenea.  
 
Octopus 
The octopus is a cephalopod with eight arms.  
 
Oesophagus 
The oesophagus is the region of the alimentary canal following the 
pharynx. The walls of the oesophagus are muscular and force food along by 
contractions.  
 
Okapi 
The okapi (Okapia johnstoni) is a ruminant of the giraffe family, 
although with much shorter legs and neck, found in the tropical 
rainforests of central Africa. Purplish brown with a creamy face and 
black and white stripes on the legs and hindquarters, it is excellently 
camouflaged. Okapis have remained virtually unchanged for millions of 
years.   
 
Okra 
see "Abelmoschus" 
 
Okro 
see "Abelmoschus" 
 
Oleaceae 
Oleaceae is a natural order of monopetalous exogenous plants. They are 
shrubs or trees with opposite, simple or compound leaves and small 
flowers.  
 
Oligochaeta 
The oligochaeta are the earthworm class of annelids, although some are 
freshwater rather than terrestial. They lay eggs in cocoons. 
 
Oligotricha 
Oligotricha is an order of ciliata vera. They are free-living, parasitic 
ciliates with the cilia restricted to certain areas of the cell-body.  
 
Olive 
The olive is an evergreen tree native to Asia.  
 
Olm 
The olm is a cave-dwelling aquatic salamander, the only European member 
of the family Proteidae, the other members being the North American 
mudpuppies. Olms are found in underground caves along the Adriatic 
seaboard in Italy, Croatia, and Yugoslavia. The adult is permanently 
larval in form, about 25cm long, almost blind, with external gills and 
under-developed limbs. 
 
Omnivore 
An omnivore is an animal that eats both plant and animal matter.  
 
Onion 
The onion (Allium cepa) is a perennial herb of the order Liliaceae. It 
has an edible brown bulb which is much used in cooking and has been for 
thousands of years.  
 
Onychophora 
Onychophora is a terrestial class of arthropod. They have a thin cuticle. 
The head is composed of three segments with one pair of jaws. 
 
Opalina 
Opalina is a member of the order of holotricha. 
 
Ophidia 
The ophidia are a suborder of squamata. These are the snakes. They are 
long and slender due to an elongation of the body. Limbs are absent, and 
limb girdle traces are usually absent. The mouth is very extensible.  
 
Ophiothrix 
Ophiothrix is an ophiuroidea. 
 
Ophiura 
Ophiura is an ophiuroidea.  
 
Ophiuroidea 
The ophiuroidea are a subclass of stelleroidea. They are the brittle 
stars. They have a flattened body clearly marked into two regions; the 
disc and the arms. Tube feet extend from the under surface of the arms, 
but the groove is closed to form a tube. Locomotion is chiefly by 
muscular movement of the arms assisted by the feet. 
 
Opossum 
The opossum is a north American marsupial.  
 
Orang utan 
The orang utan is an anthropoid ape found in borneo and sumatra.  
 
Orfe 
The orfe is a fish of the carp family.  
 
Ortolan 
The ortolan is a songbird of the bunting family, common in Europe and 
west Asia, migrating to Africa in the winter. Long considered a delicacy 
among gourmets, it has become rare and is now a protected species. 
 
Oryx 
The oryx is a large antelope found in African deserts.  
 
Osprey 
The osprey is a bird of prey. 
 
Osteichthyes 
Osteichthyes is a subclass of fishes. These are the bony fishes. The 
endoskeleton is of bone. The exoskeleton is comprised of bony scales. The 
mouth is terminal and the external nostrils lie on the dorsal surface of 
the snout.  
 
Ostracoda 
Ostracoda is a subclass of small crustaceans with a bivalved carapace and 
reduced trunk and abdominal limbs.  
 
Ostrich 
The ostrich is a member of the order Struthioniformes. It is the largest 
bird in existence. It has rudimentary wings and is incapable of flight. 
It has strong legs and can run fast for long distances.  
 
Otter 
The otter is an aquatic carnivorous mammal. 
 
Ousel 
Ousel was an ancient name for the blackbird, it is now the name of 
several birds found in Europe and the Americas.  
 
Ovaries 
see "ovary" 
 
Ovary 
The ovary is a female gonad.  
 
Owl 
The owl is a nocturnal bird of prey of the sub-order Striges. 
 
Ox 
The ox is a genus of ruminant mammal. 
 
Oxpecker 
The oxpecker is an African bird, of the genus Buphagus, of the starling 
family. It clambers about the bodies of large mammals, feeding on ticks 
and other parasites. It may help to warn the host of approaching dangers. 
 
Oyster 
The oyster is a bivalve mollusc constituting the Ostreidae, or true 
oyster, family, having the upper valve flat, the lower concave, hinged by 
an elastic ligament. The mantle, lying against the shell, protects the 
inner body, which includes respiratory, digestive, and reproductive 
organs. Oysters commonly change their sex annually or more frequently; 
females may discharge up to a million eggs during a spawning period.  
 
Oyster catcher 
The oyster catcher is a chunky shorebird of the family Haematopodidae, 
with a laterally flattened, heavy bill that can pry open mollusc shells. 
The black and white American oyster catcher Haematopus palliatus is found 
on the Atlantic and south Pacific coasts. 
 
Paca 
The paca is a large, nocturnal, burrowing rodent found in central 
America.  
 
Pachycephalosaurus 
Pachycephalosaurus was a herd living dinosaur with a 25cm thick bone on 
top of its skull which could have been used for defence against 
predators. It lived during the cretaceous period. 
 
Paguridae 
see "Hermit-crab" 
 
Palaeonisciformes 
The palaeonisciformes is an order of actinopterygii. They are carnivorous 
and have a single large dorsal fin. 
 
Palamedea 
Palamedea is a genus of South American birds. 
 
Paliurus 
Paliurus is a genus of deciduous shrubs which are natives to southern 
Europe and Asia Minor belonging to the natural order Rhamnaceae.  
 
Pallah 
The pallah (Aepyceros melampus) is a species of South African antelope. 
 
Palm 
A palm is a tree of the palmaceae family. They are found mainly in 
tropical countries. They usually have a an upright, unbranched stem and a 
head of large fan-shaped leaves. 
 
Palm-kale 
Palm-kale is a variety of cabbage which grows to around 3-4 meters tall.  
 
Palmaceae 
see "Palm" 
 
Palmelleae 
Palmelleae is a natural order of green-spored algae, amongst the lowest 
of plants and including the red snow and gory dew.  
 
Palmer Worm 
Palmer Worm is a popular name for the hairy caterpillar of the tiger-
moth.  
 
Palmyra Palm 
The Palmyra Palm (Borassus flabelliformis) is the common Indian palm, a 
tree found in the Middle East and India. When fully grown it reaches a 
height of 20 meters. 
 
Panda 
The panda is one of two carnivores of different families, native to north 
west China and Tibet. The giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) has black-
and-white fur with black eye patches and feeds mainly on bamboo shoots, 
consuming about 8 kg of bamboo per day. It can grow up to 1.5m long, and 
weigh up to 140kg. The lesser, or red, panda (Ailurus fulgens) is of the 
raccoon family, and is about 50cm long and is coloured black and 
chestnut, with a long tail. 
 
Pangolin 
The pangolin or scaly anteater is a large mammal of the genus Manis, 
order Pholidota found in tropical Asia and Africa. 
 
Pansy 
The pansy is a perennial garden flower. 
 
Paramecium 
Paramecium is a member of the order holotricha. It is a simple single 
cell animal common in fresh water where there are decaying vegetable 
remains. 
 
Parrot 
Parrot refers to any bird of the order Psittaciformes, abundant in the 
tropics, especially in Australia and South America. They are mainly 
vegetarian, and range in size from the 8.5cm pygmy parrot to the 100cm 
Amazon parrot. The smaller species are commonly referred to as parakeets. 
The plumage is often very colorful, and the call is usually a harsh 
screech. Parrots all have hooked bills and feet adapted for tree 
climbing.  
 
Parsley 
Parsley is a biennial herb. 
 
Parsnip 
The parsnip is a biennial umbelliferae. 
 
Partridge 
The partridge is any of various medium-sized ground-dwelling fowl of the 
family Phasianidae, which also includes pheasants, quail, and chickens. 
Partridges are Old World birds, some of which have become naturalised in 
North America, especially the European grey partridge (Perdix perdix), 
with mottled brown back, grey speckled breast, and patches of chestnut on 
the sides. 
 
Pea 
The pea is a climbing plant of the family leguminosae.  
 
Peach 
The peach is a tree of the family rosaceae. 
 
Peacock 
A peacock is technically the male of any of various large pheasants. The 
name is most often used for the common peacock (Pavo cristatus), a bird 
of the pheasant family, native to southern Asia. It is rather larger than 
a pheasant. The male has a large fan-shaped tail, brightly colored with 
blue, green, and purple "eyes" on a chestnut background. The female 
(peahen) is brown with a small tail. 
 
Peanut 
The peanut (ground-nut, Arachis hypogoea) is a leguminous annual plant 
with a hairy stem and abruptly pinnate leaflets. The nut is situated at 
the end of a stalk of some length, and is ripened under ground, this 
stalk having the peculiarity of flowering and then bending down and 
pushing the fruit into the earth. Peanuts are extensively cultivated in 
tropical countries. 
 
Pear 
The pear is a tree of the family rosaceae.  
 
Pecan 
The pecan is a nut producing tree.  
 
Peccary 
The peccary is one of two species of the New World genus Tayassu of 
piglike hoofed mammals. A peccary has a gland in the middle of the back 
which secretes a strong-smelling substance. Peccaries are blackish in 
colour, covered with bristles, and have tusks that point downward. Adults 
reach a height of 40cm and a weight of 25kg.  
 
Pedicellina 
Pedicellina is an entoprocta. 
 
Pekan 
The pekan (fisher marten) is a North American marten (Martes penanti). It 
is about 1.2m long, with a doglike face, and brown fur with white patches 
on the chest. It eats porcupines. 
 
Pekingese 
The pekingese is a breed of small long-haired dog first bred at the 
Chinese court as the "imperial lion dog". It has a flat skull and flat 
face, is typically less than 25cm tall, and weighs less than 5kg. 
The first specimens brought to the West were those taken during the Opium 
Wars when the Summer Palace in Beijing was looted in 1860. 
 
Pelecaniformes 
The Pelecaniformes are an order of birds. These are the pelicans. There 
are six distinct families. The foot is comprised of 4 toes connected by 
webs. 
 
Pelican 
The pelican is any of a family (Pelecanidae) of large, heavy water birds 
remarkable for the pouch beneath the bill which is used as a fishing net 
and temporary store for catches of fish. Some species grow up to 1.8m and 
have wingspans of 3m. 
 
Penguin 
Penguins are any of an order (Sphenisciformes) of marine flightless 
birds, mostly black and white, found in the southern hemisphere. They 
range in size from 40cm to 1.2m tall, and have thick feathers to protect 
them from the intense cold. They are awkward on land, but their wings 
have evolved into flippers, making them excellent swimmers. Penguins 
congregate to breed in "rookeries", and often spend many months 
incubating their eggs while their mates are out at sea feeding. 
 
Penguins 
see "Penguin" 
 
Penicillin 
Penicillin is an antibiotic fungus. 
 
Pennatula 
Pennatula is a member of the order alcyonaria.  
 
Pepper 
Pepper is a plant of the genus capsicum.  
 
Peppermint 
Peppermint is a perennial herb. 
 
Perch 
The perch is any of the largest order of spiny-finned bony fishes, the 
Perciformes, with some 8,000 species. This order includes the sea basses, 
cichlids, damselfishes, mullets, barracudas, wrasses, and gobies. Perches 
of the freshwater genus Perca are found in Europe, Asia, and North 
America. They have varied shapes and are usually a greenish color. They 
are very prolific, spawning when about three years old, and have 
voracious appetites. 
 
Percheron 
The percheron is a breed of strong and swift horse originaly bred in the 
Le Perche district of north France.  
 
Perennial 
A perennial plant is one that lives for more than 2 years.  
 
Perissodactyla 
Perissodactyla is an order of eutheria. They are odd toed ungulates. 
Horses, tapirs and rhinoceroses. They eat vegetables and have a large 
caecum. The Stomach is simple. 
 
Peritricha 
Peritricha is an order of ciliata vera. They have a cone-shaped cell-body 
on a highly contractile stalk and a spiral of cilia leading to the 
cytostome. 
 
Periwinkle 
In zoology, the periwinkle is any marine snail of the family 
Littorinidae, found on the shores of Europe and eastern North America. 
Periwinkles have a conical spiral shell, and feed on algae. 
 
Petrel 
The petrel is any of various families of seabirds, including the 
worldwide storm petrels (family Procellariidae), which include the 
smallest seabirds, and the diving petrels (family Pelecanoididae) of the 
southern hemisphere, which feed by diving underwater and are 
characterized by having nostril tubes. They include fulmars and 
shearwaters.  
 
Phaethontidae 
The Phaethontidae is a family of the Pelecaniformes. These are the 
tropicbirds. They are the smallest member of the order. There are 3 
species. They are about 2 feet long. They have 2 long central tail 
feathers. 
 
Phalarope 
Phalarope is any of a genus Phalaropus of small, elegant shorebirds in 
the sandpiper family (Scolopacidae). They have the habit of spinning in 
the water to stir up insect larvae. They are native to North America, 
Britain, and the polar regions of Europe. The male phalarope is courted 
by the female and hatches the eggs. The female is always larger and more 
colourful. The red-necked phalarope Phalaropus lobatus, grey Phalaropus 
fulicarius, and Wilson's phalarope Phalaropus tricolour can be found in 
North America.  
 
Pharynx 
The pharynx is a region of the alimentary canal following the buccal 
cavity.  
 
Pheasant 
The pheasant is a ground nesting bird.  
 
Pheasant's Eye 
see "Adonis" 
 
Phoronis 
Phoronis is a phylum phoronida. 
 
Phylloxera 
Phylloxera is any of a family (Phylloxeridae) of small plant-sucking 
insects (order Homoptera) that attack the leaves and roots of some 
plants. The species Phylloxera vitifolia, a native of North America, 
attacks grapevines, laying its eggs under the bark.  
 
Phylum annelida 
The phylum annelida are the segmented worms. They are triploblastic, 
metamerically segmented, coelomate metazoa. The body wall is covered by a 
glandular epidermis and comprised of longitudinal and circular muscles.  
 
Phylum arthropoda 
Phylum arthropoda is the arthropod group of animals which includes; 
crayfish, lobsters, spiders, insects etc. They are metamerically 
segmented and bilaterally symmetrical animals. Typically, each segment 
has a pair of jointed appendages and at least one pair is modified as 
jaws. 
 
Phylum brachiopoda 
The phylum brachiopoda are the lamp shells. They are triploblastic 
animals enclosed in a dorsal and a ventral shell. The anterior part of 
the body bears a horsheoe-shaped ridge covered in ciliated tentacles. The 
coelom is extensive and continued into the folds of the body wall below 
the shell and into the tentacles. A simple vascular system is present.  
 
Phylum chaetognatha 
The phylum chaetognatha are the arrow worms. They are relatively simple 
triploblastic animals. The body is elongated and transparent. The gut is 
just a straight tube. The body has three regions; head, trunk and tail. 
The head bears a hood and rows of chitinous hooks. There is no blood 
vascular system. Eyes are usually present. The male gonads are in the 
tail, the female ovaries in the trunk.  
 
Phylum chordata 
The phylum chordata are a group of animals with a notochord present. The 
central nervous system is dorsal, hollow and tubular. They have a ventral 
heart and visceral clefts present in the pharynx.  
 
Phylum echinodermata 
The phylum echinodermata are starfishes, sea urchins, brittle stars and 
sea cucumbers. They are triploblastic coelomate marine animals. A 
calcareous skeleton is developed in the mesoderm. The coelom is divided 
into separte compartments which each carry out different functions. 
 
Phylum mollusca 
Phylum mollusca is the mollusc group of animals. They are coelomate 
animals which do not show segmentation. The body is comprised of a head, 
foot and visceral mass. The skin of the viscreal mass is extended into 
soft folds which form the mantle which often secretes a shell. The 
respiratory organs are usually a pair of ctenidia. 
 
Phylum nematoda 
Phylum nematoda are the roundworms. They are triploblastic animals with 
elongated, spindle-shaped bodies. A respiratory and blood vascular system 
are both lacking. The epidermis secretes a tough cuticle. Cilia are 
lacking. The roundworms are to be found everywhere that life can be 
supported.  
 
Phylum phoronida 
The phylum phoronida are small marine gregarious zooids each enclosed in 
a membranous tube. They are triploblastic coelomate animals with a u 
shaped gut. Both the mouth and the anus are surrounded by a horeshoe-
shaped ridge bearing numerous tentacles. The animals are hermaphrodite.  
 
Phylum platyhelminthes 
Phylum platyhelminthes is the family of flatworms. These are triplobastic 
acoelomate animals. They are usually small and leaf-like shaped. The 
alimentary canal has a single aperture, the mouth. Nitrogenous exrection 
and osmo-regulation are carried out by a flame-bulb system. These animals 
have a complex reproductive system, which is usually hermaphrodite. 
 
Phylum polyzoa 
The phylum polyzoa are small colonial animals usually resembling sea-
weeds. They are mostly marine. The individuals of the colony are termed 
zooids and have a crown of ciliated tentacles. 
 
Phylum protozoa 
Phylum protozoa are microscopic animals whose bodies are not divided into 
seperate cells. 
 
Phylum rotifera 
The phylum rotifera are minute triploblastic animals lacking a true 
coelom. The body is of variable shape and protected by a cuticle. The gut 
is complicated. A crown of cilia and a spiral, ciliated tract lies in 
front of the mouth. There are separate sexes. 
 
Physalia 
Physalia is a member of the order of siphonophora.  
 
Physiology 
Physiology is the study of animal's activities. 
 
Phytomastigina 
The phytomastigina are a plant-like sub-class of mastigophora.  
 
Pig 
The pig (hog) is a hoofed mammal of the genus Sus, of the suidae family. 
The head is prolonged into a pointed snout. The feet have four toes. The 
skin is very thick and covered with stiff bristles. Pigs are very alert 
and inquisitive animals. The meat pork is obtained from pigs. 
 
Pig-fish 
see "Grunt" 
 
Pig-nut 
Pig-nut (Carya glabra) is a hickory tree. 
 
Pigeon 
The pigeon is a general term for birds of the Columbidae family.  
 
Pike 
The pike is a member of the palaeonisciformes order.  
 
Pilchard 
The pilchard is any of various small, oily members of the herring family, 
Clupeidae, especially the commercial sardine of Europe (Sardina 
pilchardus), and the California sardine (Sardinops sagax).  
 
Pilewort 
see "Celandine" 
 
Pilotfish 
The pilotfish is a small marine fish Naucrates ductor of the family 
Carangidae, which also includes pompanos. It hides below sharks, turtles, 
or boats, using the shade as a base from which to prey on smaller fish. 
It is found in all warm oceans and grows to about 36 cm/1.2 ft. 
 
Pimpernel 
Pimpernel (Anagallis) is a genus of plants belonging to the natural order 
Primulaceae.  
 
Pine 
The pine is an evergreen conifer from which turpentine, tar and pitch are 
derived.  
 
Pineapple 
The pineapple is a plant native to south and central America but 
cultivated in many warmer climates.  
 
Pintado 
see "Guinea-fowl" 
 
Pintail 
The pintail is a British duck.  
 
Pinworm 
The pinworm is a nematode worm Enterobius vermicularis. It is an 
intestinal parasite of humans. 
 
Piranha 
The piranha is a South American freshwater fish of the genus Serrusalmus, 
in the same order as cichlids. They can grow to 60cm long, and have 
razor-sharp teeth; some species may rapidly devour animals, especially if 
attracted by blood. 
 
Pisces 
Pisces is the fish class of vertebrates. They are aquatic vertebrates 
with a streamlined body. The tail is a powerful muscular propulsion 
organ. The paired limbs are the pectoral and pelvic fins which regulate 
the swimming level. Median fins are present and maintain stability. 
 
Pitta 
The pitta is a genus of tropical songless bird of order Passeriformes, 
genus Pitta, forming the family Pillidae. Some 20 species are native to 
south east Asia, west Africa, and Australia. They have round bodies, big 
heads, and are often brightly coloured. They live on the ground and in 
low undergrowth, and can run from danger.  
 
Plaice 
Plaice is any of various flatfishes of the flounder group, especially the 
genera Pleuronectes and Hippoglossoides.  
 
Planaria 
Planaria is a member of the order tricladida. 
 
Plankton 
Plankton is minute plant and animal organisms found in water. It is a 
source of food for many fish and whales.  
 
Plant 
A plant is a living organism which does not have the ability to move, and 
does not have sensory organs or digestive organs. 
 
Plantain 
Plantain is a tropical herbaceous plant similar to the banana.  
 
Plasmodium 
Plasmodium is an animal of the suborder haemosporidia.  
 
Plastron 
A plastron is a ventral shield. 
 
Plateosaurus 
Plateosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur from the triassic era. It grew to 
6m long and 3m tall. Plateosaurus digested food with the aid of swallowed 
stones. 
 
Platypus 
The platypus is a monotreme mammal found in Tasmania and Australia. 
 
Platyrrhina 
The platyrrhina are a suborder of anthropoidea. The nostrils face 
forwards. The internasal septum is broad and they have three premolars. 
The tail may be prehensile. 
 
Pleurobrachia 
Pleurobrachia is a member of the sub-phylum ctenophora family.  
 
Plum 
The plum is a tree bearing the fruit of the same name.  
 
Pochard 
The pochard are various diving ducks found in Europe and North America, 
especially the genus Aythya.  
 
Podiceps 
Podiceps (Grebe) is a genus of birds of the family Colymbidae 
characterized by a straight conical bill, no tail, a short tarsus, 
flattened toes which are separate but broadly fringed at their edges by a 
firm membrane and legs set so far back that on land the Grebe adopts the 
upright stance of a penguin. They are excellent swimmers and feed on 
small fish, frogs, crustaceans and insects.  
 
Podicipediformes 
The Podicipediformes are an order of birds. These are the grebes. They 
are water birds. They don't have webbed feet, instead each toe is fringed 
separately. They build floating nests directly on the water. 
 
Polecat 
The polecat is an Old World weasel (Mustela putorius) with a brown back 
and dark belly and two yellow face patches. The body is about 50cm long 
and it has a strong smell from anal gland secretions. It is native to 
Asia, Europe, and north Africa. 
 
Pollack 
The pollack is a marine fish (Pollachius virens) of the cod family. It 
grows to 75cm, and is found close to the shore on both sides of the north 
Atlantic.  
 
Polychaeta 
The polychaeta are the bristle worms. They are a class of marine phylum 
annelida with obvious segmentation. The head usually bears tentacles and 
palps. 
 
Polycladida 
The polycladida is a marine order of turbellaria. The gut has numerous 
caeca which ramify through the body. Numerous simple eyes are usually 
present. 
 
Polygordius 
The polygordius are archiannelida.  
 
Polymastigina 
Polymastigina are an order of zoomastigina. They are flagellates with 
four or more flagella.  
 
Polystoma 
Polystoma is a member of the order monogenea. 
 
Pomeranian 
The pomeranian is a breed of toy dog, about 15cm high, weighing about 3 
kg. It has long straight hair with a neck frill, and the tail is carried 
over the back. 
 
Pony 
A pony is a small horse less than 14.2 hands tall.  
 
Poodle 
The poodle is a breed of gun dog, including the standard poodle (above 
38cm at the shoulder), the miniature poodle(below 38cm), and the toy 
poodle (below 28 cm) varieties. The dense curly coat, usually cut into an 
elaborate style, is often either black or white, although greys and 
browns are also bred. The poodle probably originated in Russia, was 
naturalized in Germany, where it was used for retrieving ducks and gained 
its name and became a luxury dog in France. 
 
Porcupine 
A porcupine is any rodent with quills on its body, belonging to either of 
two families: Old World porcupines (family Hystricidae) are terrestrial 
in habit and have long black-and-white quills; or New World porcupines 
(family Erethizontidae) which are tree-dwelling, with prehensile tails 
and much shorter quills.  
 
Porosphora 
Poroshora is a member of the gregarinida order. 
 
Porpoise 
A porpoise is any small whale of the family Delphinidae that, unlike 
dolphins, have blunt snouts without beaks. Common porpoises of the genus 
Phocaena can grow to 1.8 m long; they feed on fish and crustaceans. 
 
Portuguese man-of-war 
A Portuguese man-of-war is any of a genus Physalia of phylum 
Coelenterata. They live in the sea, in colonies, and have a large air-
filled bladder on top and numerous hanging tentacles made up of feeding, 
stinging, and reproductive individuals. The float can be 30cm long. 
 
Potato 
The potato is a perennial solanaceae. 
 
Potto 
The potto is an arboreal, nocturnal, African prosimian primate 
Perodicticus potto belonging to the loris family. It has a thick body, 
strong limbs, and grasping feet and hands, and grows to 40cm long, with 
horny spines along its backbone, which it uses in self-defense. It climbs 
slowly, and eats insects, snails, fruit, and leaves.  
 
Powan 
The powan is a fish found in Loch Lomond, Scotland. It is of the same 
genus as the polland and the vendace. Also known as the fresh-water 
herring.  
 
Prairie dog 
The prairie dog is a burrowing rodent.  
 
Primate 
Primate is the family of mammals that includes humans, apes, monkeys, 
lemurs bushbabies, lorises and tarsiers.  
 
Primrose 
The primrose is a woodland plant common in Europe.  
 
Proboscidea 
The proboscidea are an order of eutheria. They are large animals of the 
ungulate type. The two upper incisors are modified to form tusks. Canines 
and  
Premolars are lacking. 
 
Procellariiformes 
The Procellariiformes are an order of birds. These are the tube-nosed 
swimmers. They are sea birds of about 100 species. They have a horn 
sheathed bill, tubular nostrils and webbed feet.  
 
Pronghorn 
The pronghorn is a ruminant mammal (Antilocapra americana) constituting 
the family Antilocapridae, native to the west USA. It is not a true 
antelope. It is light brown and about 1m high. It sheds its horns 
annually and can reach speeds of 100 kph. 
 
Protomonadina 
Protomonadina are an order of zoomastigina. They are small colourless 
flagellates. In the trypanosomes is a single flagellum. 
 
Protoplasm 
Protoplasm is the basic living substance of all animals, rather than the 
dead substances such as found in nails and hair. It is responsible for 
carrying out all the vital activities characteristic of living animals. 
 
Protozoa 
The Protozoa are a division of primitive animals consisting of a single 
cell. 
 
Prussian Carp 
see "Gibel" 
 
Ptarmigan 
The ptarmigan is a Scottish bird similar to the grouse. 
 
Pteranodon 
Pteranodon was a flying reptile of the cretaceous period. It had a wing 
span of 7m and fed on sea fish. 
 
Pterygota 
Pterygota is a two division subclass of insecta. In the first division 
are the cockroaches, locusts, earwigs, lice, termites etc. In the second 
division the butterflies, moths, beetles, ants, bees, wasps fleas, gnats 
and meat-flies etc.  
 
Puffer fish 
The puffer fish is a fish of the family Tetraodontidae. As a means of 
defense it inflates its body with air or water until it becomes spherical 
and the skin spines become erect. Puffer fish are mainly found in warm 
waters, where they feed on molluscs, crustaceans, and coral. 
 
Puffin 
The puffin is a sea bird found in the north atlantic. 
 
Puma 
The puma is a large wild cat found in the Americas. 
 
Pumpkin 
The pumpkin is a trailing plant of the gourd genus with heart shaped five 
lobed leaves. 
 
Pyrus 
Pyrus is a genus of ornamental and fruit trees belonging to the pomeous 
section of the natural order of Rosaceae. 
 
Python 
The python is a genus of constricting snake found in the tropics and 
allied to the Boidae.  
 
Quadruped 
Quadruped is the group of animals with four feet. 
 
Quagga 
The quagga is an African mammal related to the zebra. 
 
Quail 
The quail is the smallest species of the partridge family.  
 
Quaking Grass 
see "Briza" 
 
Quamash 
Quamash (Camassia esculenta) is a North American plant of the lily family 
with an edible root which is eaten by the Indians.  
 
Quamoclit 
Quamoclit is a genus of climbing ornamental plants of the natural order 
Convolvulaceae. 
 
Quetzal 
The quetzal is a long-tailed Central American bird (Pharomachus mocinno) 
of the trogon family. The male is brightly coloured, with green, red, 
blue, and white feathers, and is about 1.3m long including the tail. The 
female is smaller and lacks the tail and plumage. The quetzal eats fruit, 
insects, and small frogs and lizards. It is the national emblem of 
Guatemala, and was considered sacred by the Mayans and the Aztecs. 
 
Quezal 
The quezal is a bird found in Central America. It is a member of the 
Trogon family. It is about the size of a magpie and the male has tail-
feathers which are an emerald green colour and are about 3 feet long. The 
quezal lives in forests and feeds on fruits. 
 
Quince 
The quince is a tree of the rosaceae family.  
 
Rabbit 
The rabbit is a long eared burrowing mammal.  
 
Raccoon 
The raccoon is an omnivorous nocturnal mammal found in the Americas.  
 
Racoon 
The racoon is an American plantigrade carnivorous mammal. It has grayish-
brown fur which is used for making hats. 
 
Radiolaria 
The radiolaria are an order of rhizopoda. They are radially symetrical 
and live in the surface layers of seas. They have stiff, radiating 
pseudopodia and a skeleton. 
 
Ragwort 
The ragwort is a perennial plant found on waste ground. 
 
Rail 
A rail is any wading bird of the family Rallidae, including the rails 
proper (genus Rallus), coots, moorhens, and gallinules. Rails have dark 
plumage, a short neck and wings, and long legs. They are 10-45cm long.  
 
Rape 
Rape are two plant species of the mustard family cultivated for the 
edible oil. 
 
Rasores 
The rasores are an order of birds. It includes the sub-orders of fowls, 
turkeys, partridges and grouse. They are characterised by their toes 
which end in strong claws used for scratching. Hence they are called the 
scratchers. 
 
Raspberry 
The raspberry is a prickly plant of the rosaceae family.  
 
Rat 
The rat is a rodent of the genus Rattus. There are a number of varieties, 
including the brown rat and the black rat.  
 
Rat-snake 
The rat-snake is a snake domesticated in Sri Lanka for killing rats. It 
is an easily tamed snake. 
 
Ratel 
The ratel or honey-badger is a carnivorous quadruped of the genus 
Mellivora, and of the badger family. It is found in south and east Africa 
and India. The South African ratel averages about 3 feet in length 
including an 8 or 9 inch tail. 
 
Ratitae 
The ratitae are an order of neornithes. They are large running birds, 
unable to fly.  
 
Ratite 
The ratite is a flightless bird with a breastbone without the keel to 
which flight muscles are attached. Examples are the ostrich, rhea, emu, 
cassowary, and kiwi.  
 
Rattlesnake 
The rattlesnake is a name of various American venomous snakes of the 
genus Crotalus, and family Crotalidae. They are distinguished by having a 
tail which terminates in a number of horny pieces which the animal 
vibrates to make a rattling sound.  
 
Raven 
The raven is a large bird of the crow family, genus Corvus. It feeds on 
carrion. It is completely black in colour, and can learn to imitate human 
speech. 
 
Ray 
The ray is a name of many elasmobranchiate fishes, including the skate. 
They are are recognised by a flattened body and by the extremely broad 
and fleshy pectoral fins which appear as continuations of the body.  
 
Razor-back 
The razor-back is a large whale.  
 
Razor-shell 
The razor-shell is a genus of lamellibranchiate mollusc common on British 
coasts. 
 
Razorbill 
The razorbill is a North Atlantic sea bird (Alca torda) of the auk 
family, which breeds on cliffs and migrates south in winter. It has a 
curved beak and is black above and white below. It uses its wings as 
paddles when diving. Razorbills are common off Newfoundland.  
 
Red Gurnard 
Red Gurnard (Trigla cuculus) is a British coastal fish of the Gurnard 
genus.  
 
Red-mouth 
see "Grunt" 
 
Redshank 
The redshank is a bird of the genus Totanus, so named because of the red 
colouring of its legs. It is found in Britain. 
 
Redstart 
The redstart is a bird of the Sylviadae family. It has a red tail. It is 
found in Britain during the summer.  
 
Redwing 
The redwing is a bird and a species of thrush. It is found in Britain 
during the winter, and in Europe and Asia during the summer.  
 
Reebok 
The reebok is a species of South African antelope. It has smooth, long, 
straight and slender horns. It stands 2.5 feet at the shoulder and is a 
very fast runner. 
 
Reed 
Reeds are perennial aquatic grasses.  
 
Reeve 
Reeve is the name of the female ruff bird.  
 
Reindeer 
Reindeer are a species of deer found in north Europe and north Asia. It 
has branched, recurved, round antlers. The legs are quite short in 
proportion to the body. The Laplanders often use reindeer as a substitute 
for horses, sheep and cattle, using them for pulling sledges, food, and 
clothing.  
 
Remora 
The remora is a genus of fish included in the Goby family. They have on 
top of their head a peculiar sucking-disc which they use to attach 
themselves to the bottom of other fish or ships. 
 
Reproduction 
Reproduction is the unique property possessed by all living organisms to 
produce new individuals resembling the original organism in all essential 
respects.  
 
Reptile 
see "reptilia" 
 
Reptiles 
see "reptilia" 
 
Reptilia 
Reptilia is a class of cold-blooded, lung breathing vertebrates which 
includes snakes, lizards, crocodiles, turtles and tortoises.  
 
Respiration 
Respiration is the process of breathing. It is the liberation of energy 
from materials within the body of the organism. 
 
Rhabdocoelida 
The rhabdocoelida are an order of turbellaria with a simple sac-like 
intestine or no intestine. 
 
Rhea 
The rhea is a South American bird. It is about 4 feet tall. It is 
incapable of flight, but has strong legs and can run very fast. 
 
Rhinoceros 
A Rhinocerous is an odd-toed hoofed mammal of the family Rhinocerotidae. 
The one-horned Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis) is up to 2 m high 
at the shoulder, with a tubercled skin, folded into shieldlike pieces; 
the African rhinoceroses are smooth-skinned and two-horned. The African 
black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis) is 1.5m high, with a prehensile upper 
lip for feeding on shrubs; the broad-lipped or "white" rhinoceros 
Ceratotherium simum is actually slaty-gray, with a squarish mouth for 
browsing grass. They are solitary and vegetarian, with poor eyesight but 
excellent hearing and smell. 
 
Rhizocrinus 
The rhizocrinus is a type of crinoidea. 
 
Rhizomastigina 
The rhizomastigina are an order of rhizopoda. They are small amoeboid 
forms with a flagellum. They live in fresh water. 
 
Rhizopoda 
Rhizopoda is a class of phylum protozoa which are usually free-living and 
move and ingest food by means of pseudopodia. 
 
Rhododendron 
The rhododendron is an evergreen shrub of the ericaceae family. 
 
Rhubarb 
Rhubarb is a perennial plant. 
 
Roach 
The roach is a freshwater fish of north Europe. 
 
Roadrunner 
The roadrunner is a north American bird of the cuckoo family. 
 
Robin 
The robin is one of two songbirds of the thrush family. The North 
American thrush, the robin Turdus migratorius is 25 cm long, grey brown 
with brick-red underparts. The Eurasian and African thrush (Erithacus 
rubecula) is 13 cm long, olive brown above with a red breast. 
 
Rodent 
The rodent is a mammal of the family rodentia. They have a single pair of 
incisor teeth in both the upper and lower jaws that continue to grow as 
they become worn. 
 
Rodentia 
Rodentia is the rodent order of eutheria. The incisors are chisel-like 
and used for gnawing. Canines are absent.  
 
Roller 
A roller is any brightly coloured bird of the Old World family 
Coraciidae, resembling crows but in the same order as kingfishers and 
hornbills. Rollers grow up to 32cm long. The name is derived from the 
habit of some species of rolling over in flight. 
 
Rook 
The rook is a member of the crow family.  
 
Rookery 
A rookery is a colony of rooks, penguins or seals.  
 
Rooks 
see "Rook" 
 
Roost 
A roost is a bird's perching or resting place.  
 
Rosaceae 
The rosaceae is the rose family. They exhibit an exogenous mode of 
growth, have several petals, distinct, perigynous, separate carpels and 
numerous stamens.  
 
Rose 
The rose are shrubs and climbing plants of the genus rosa and family 
rosaceae.  
 
Rosemary 
Rosemary is an evergreen shrub. 
 
Rotifer 
Rotifer is a phylum rotifera. 
 
Rottweiler 
The rottweiler is a breed of German guard dog.  
 
Roundworm 
Roundworm is a common name for phylum nematoda. 
 
Roundworms 
see "roundworm" 
 
Rudd 
The rudd (Scardinius erythrophthalmus) is a freshwater fish, a type of 
minnow, belonging to the carp family Cypridae, common in lakes and slow 
rivers of Europe; now introduced in the USA. Brownish green above and 
silvery below, with red fins and golden eyes, it can reach a length of 45 
cm and a weight of 1kg.  
 
Ruff 
The ruff is a bird belonging to the grallatores (waders). It was once 
abundant in Britain.  
 
Rumex acetosa 
see "Sorrel" 
 
Ruminant 
Ruminant is the group of animals (ruminate) that have more than one 
stomach and chew the cud. 
 
Ruminantia 
The ruminantia are a group of even-toed hoofed mammals, including 
chevrotains, camels, deer, giraffes, the prong-buck and cattle. 
 
Ruminate 
The term "ruminate" refers to animals (ruminants) which regurgitate 
swallowed food and chew it again. This process is accomplished by means 
of a complex stomach. 
 
Ruminates 
see "ruminate" 
 
Ruminating 
see "ruminate" 
 
Sabella 
Sabella are polychaeta. 
 
Sable 
The sable is a carnivorous type of marten.  
 
Sage 
Sage is a perennial herb. 
 
Sagitta 
Sagitta is a phylum chaetognatha. 
 
Salamander 
The salamander is an urodela. 
 
Salicaceae 
The salicaceae are a natural order of apetalous exogens distinguised by a 
2 valved capsule, and numerous seeds tufted with long hairs.  
 
Samoyed 
The samoyed is a Siberian breed of dog. 
 
Sandbox tree 
The Sandbox tree is an American tree of the genus Hura. It is a large 
branching tree with glossy leaves and large, furrowed, round fruits about 
the size of an orange. When the seed-vessels burts they make a remarkably 
loud retort.  
 
Sandwort 
Sandwort (Arenaria) is a genus of plants of the natural order 
Caryophyllaceae, comprising low herbs with usually awl-shaped leaves and 
small white flowers. 
 
Saponaria 
see "Soap-wort" 
 
Sardine 
The sardine are several small fish of the herring family. 
 
Saxifragaceae 
The saxifragaceae are an order of plants with five sepals, five petals 
and ten stamens. They are generally mountain plants. 
 
Scallop 
The scallop is a marine mollusc.  
 
Scaphopoda 
Scaphopodais a class of phylum mollusca. The foot is reduced and the 
shell is tubular.  
 
Scarab 
The scarab is a type of dung beetle.  
 
Schistosoma 
Schistosoma is a member of the order digenea. 
 
Scorpion 
see "scorpionidea" 
 
Scorpion-grass 
Scorpion-grass is another name for forget-me-not. 
 
Scorpionidea 
Scorpionidea is the scorpion order of arachnida. They have four pairs of 
lung-books in the mesosoma and the post-anal telson forms a sting.!  
 
Scorpions 
see "scorpionidea" 
 
Scyphozoa 
Scyphozoa is the class of marine animals known as jelly-fishes. The adult 
is always medusoid, and there is an extensive system of radial canals, 
sense organs and tentaculocysts. 
 
Sea gooseberry 
The sea gooseberry is a common name for the sub-phylum ctenophora family. 
 
sea-ear 
see "Haliotis" 
 
Sea-Grass 
see "Grass-wrack" 
 
Sea-Horse 
see "Hippocampus" 
 
Sea-needle 
see "Gar-fish" 
 
Sea-pike 
see "Gar-fish" 
 
Sea-Swallow 
Sea-swallow is an alternative name for the tern.  
 
Seal 
The seal is a marine mammal of the phocidae family. 
 
Seals 
see "Seal" 
 
Sea urchin 
see "echinoidea" 
 
Sea urchins 
see "echinoidea" 
 
Segmented worm 
see "phylum_annelida" 
 
Selachii 
The selachii are an order of chondrichthyes. This order includes the 
sharks and the rays. They have numerous teeth which are replaced in rapid 
succession throughout life.  
 
Selenidium 
Selenidium is a member of the gregarinida order.  
 
Sensitivity 
Sensitivity is the ability of an animal to respond to stimuli from its 
surroundings.  
 
Sequoia 
The sequoia is the world's largest tree, growing to over 80 meters tall.  
 
Sertularia 
Sertularia is a member of the order of calyptoblastea.  
 
Sesame 
Sesame is an annual plant of the order pedaliaceae. 
 
Setter 
A setter is a breed of gun dog. 
 
Shad 
The shad is a fish of the herring family. 
 
Shag 
The shag is a British sea bird. 
 
Shag-bark 
The Shag-bark (Carya alba) is a hickory tree from which the hickory-nut 
is obtained.  
 
Shallot 
The shallot is a type of onion. 
 
Shamrock 
The shamrock are several trifoliate plants of the family leguminosae. 
 
Shark 
The shark is a large group of marine fish with cartilaginous skeletons. 
 
Sheep 
Sheep are a ruminant hoofed mammal of the bovidae family. 
 
Shelduck 
The shelduck is a British coastal duck. 
 
Shoveler 
The shoveler is a British duck. 
 
Shrew 
The shrew is an insectivorous mammal of the family soricidae. 
 
Shrimp 
see "shrimps" 
 
Shrimps 
Shrimps are malacostraca. 
 
Siamang 
The siamang is a type of gibbon native to Malaysia and Sumatra. 
 
Siberian pine 
see "Cembra_pine" 
 
Sidewinder 
The sidewinder is a type of rattlesnake.  
 
Siphonophora 
Siphonophora is an order of hydrozoa. They are pelagic, colonial animals 
which show marked polymorphism.  
 
Sirenia 
The sirenia is an order of eutheria. They are large herbivorous animals 
adapated to life in shallow sea.  
 
Sitatunga 
The sitatunga are a type of antelope found in swamp regions of central 
Africa.  
 
Skate 
Skate are several species of flatfish.  
 
Skink 
The skinks are a large family of lizards with large smooth scales, under 
which is a bony plate. 
 
Skirret 
Skirret is a plant of the order Umbelliferae. It is a perennial plant 
native to China and Japan, sometimes cultivated for its edible roots. 
 
Skua-gull 
The skua-gull is a powerful bird of the family Stercorarius. It is found 
in The Shetland Islands, Iceland and the Faroes. 
 
Skull 
The skull is a term applied to the skeleton bones of the cranium and 
visceral skeleton. 
 
Skunk 
The skunk is a north American mammal of the weasel family.  
 
Skunk-cabbage 
Skunk-cabbage is a plant of the natural order Araceae so named for its 
smell. The root and seeds are antispasmodic and were at one time used to 
treat asthma. 
 
Slater 
Slater was a popular name for woodlice around the turn of the century.  
 
Sloe 
Sloe (blackthorn) is a deciduous shrub of the plum genus with spinose 
branches and hard tough wood. The black berries are used for preserves 
and a fictious port wine.  
 
Sloth 
The sloth is a south American herbivorous mammal. 
 
Smelt 
The smelt is a small European fish allied to the Salmon which lives in 
the salt water around the mouths of rivers. It is around 4 to 8 inches 
long and silvery-white in colour. During May to August the smelt comes up 
river to spawn in fresh water before then returning to the sea. 
 
Smew 
The smew is a swimming bird found in winter along the British coast. It 
is about 15 to 18 inches long. The male has a white underside and black 
back. The wings are black and white. The female is red-brown with gray 
tints. 
 
Smilaceae 
Smilaceae are a tribe of plants of the order Liliaceae. They are mostly 
climbing plants with woody stems and small unisexual flowers. 
 
Snail 
The snail is an air breathing gastropod mollusc with a spiral shell.  
 
Snake 
A snake is a reptile of the suborder serpentes. 
 
Snake-wood 
Snake-wood is the wood of the Strychnos colubrina, of the order 
Loganiaceae. It is a tree found in India and Java.  
 
Sneeze-wood 
Sneeze-wood is the popular name of the South African tree Pteroxylon 
utile. It is of the order Sapindaceae and yields a strong durable timber 
which is dusty to work with, and causes sneezing. 
 
Sneezewort 
Sneezewort is a British composite plant of the milfoil genus. It flowers 
between July and August. 
 
Snipe 
The snipe is a European marsh bird. 
 
Snow-bunting 
The snow-bunting is a gregarious, passerine bird belonging to the bunting 
family. It is a native of arctic regions and a winter visitor to Britiain 
and other temperate regions.  
 
Snow-goose 
The snow-goose is a species of goose which lives in arctic regions. 
 
Snowdrop 
The snowdrop is a plant of the genus Galanthus of the order 
Amaryllidaceae. It bears solitary, drooping and elegant white flowers 
which appear in February. 
 
Soap-wort 
Soap-wort (saponaria) is a genus of plants of the order Caryophyllaceae. 
They are so named because the bruised leaves produce a lather like soap 
when agitated in water.  
 
Soko 
The Soko is a herbivorous mammal closely allied to the chimpanzees. It 
was discovered living near Lake Tanganyika by Dr. Livingstone. 
 
Solanaceae 
Solanaceae is a natural order of monopetalous exogenous plants, composed 
of herbs or shrubs, natives of most parts of the world, and especially 
within the tropics. They have alternate leaves, terminal or axillary 
inflorescence, and regular, or nearly regular, monopetalous flowers. They 
are generally narcotic and poisonous, although some parts of the plants 
are cultivated for food (such as the potato and aubergine).  
 
Solaster 
Solaster is an asteroidea.  
 
Soldanella 
Soldanella is a genus of plants of the order Primulaceae. the species are 
small herbs native to alpine districts. 
 
Sole 
Sole is a flatfish. 
 
Solidago 
see "Golden-rod" 
 
Solidungula 
Solidungula is a division of the Ungulata mammals which includes the 
horse and donkey.  
 
Soosoo 
The soosoo is a cetaceous mammal similar to a dolphin. It is found in the 
Ganges and grows to about 4 meters in length. 
 
Sophora 
Sophora is a genus of plants of the order Leguminosae. The species are 
ornamental shrubs and trees found chiefly in central and tropical Asia, 
and the tropical and sub-tropical parts of South America.  
 
Sorghum 
Sorghum is a genus of grasses. They are the tall grasses with succulent 
stems and are found in the tropical parts of Asia and other warm regions. 
 
Soricidae 
Soricidae is a family of insectivorous mammals which includes the shrews 
and musk-rats. 
 
Sorrel 
Sorrel (Rumex acetosa) is a plant of the order Polygonaceae. The leaves 
are used in salad. The stems are upright and grow to about 0.5 meters.  
 
Sorrel-tree 
The Sorrel-tree is a tree belonging to the order Ericaceae. It inhabits 
the range of the Alleghanies from Virginia to Georgia. The leaves are 10 
to 12 cm long, oval and finely toothed.  
 
Spaniel 
The spaniels are a sub-species of dogs characterized by great 
intelligence and an affectionate disposition. 
 
Sparidae 
Sparidae is a family of acanthopterygious, teleostean fishes. They form 
the genus Sparus. 
 
Sparrow 
Sparrow is a term applied to many small thick beaked birds. 
 
Spatangus 
Spatangus is a genus of sea-urchines, popularly called the heart-urchins 
from their shape.  
 
Spatularia 
Spatularia is a genus of fishes of the sturgeon tribe which are 
remarkable for their long, leaf-like snouts.  
 
Spearmint 
Spearmint (Mentha viridis) is a European and North American species of 
mint cultivated for its flavouring properties. 
 
Spearwort 
Spearwort is a plant of the genus Ranunculus. There are two species, the 
great and the lesser spearwort. Both are British plants with lanceolate 
undivided leaves and yellow flowers, growing in wet localities.  
 
Speedwell 
Speedwell is a flowering plant of the figwort family. 
 
Sphenisciformes 
The Sphenisciformes are an order of birds. These are the penguins. They 
comprise a single family, Spheniscidae. They are water birds with a 
streamlined body and elongated head. The beak is stout and ends in a 
sharp point. They are incapable of flight, instead their wings have 
adapted as short powerful paddles. 
 
Spider 
see "araneida" 
 
Spongilla 
The spongilla is a member of the demospongia class. 
 
Spoonbill 
The spoonbill is a water bird.  
 
Sporozoa 
Sporozoa are a class of phylum protozoa. They are parasitic protozoa 
propagated by spores.  
 
Springbok 
The springbok is an antelope found in south Africa. 
 
Spruce 
The spruce is a coniferous tree.  
 
Squamata 
The squamata is an order of diapsida. The lower border of the lower 
temporal vacuity is incomplete. The body is covered by horny scales. 
These animals live in warmer climates.  
 
Squash 
Squash (Cucurbita Melopepo) is a gourd cultivated in America as an 
article of food. 
 
Squirrel 
The squirrel is a bushy tailed rodent of the sciuridae family.  
 
St. Bernard 
The St. Bernard is a breed of large dog. It has a massive head and 
somewhat pendulous lips. They were bred by the monks at the hospice of 
St. Bernard to track out and succour travellers caught in snow-storms or 
avalanches. At the start of the 19th century all the females died, and 
the monks had to cross-breed them with Newfoundlands, and the modern St. 
Bernard is still of this cross.  
 
Stag 
Stag is the name given to a male deer.  
 
Stallion 
A stallion is a male horse. 
 
Stamen 
The stamen is the male reproductive organ of a flower.  
 
Starfish 
see "asteroidea" 
 
Starling 
The starling is a bird. 
 
Stegosaurus 
Stegosaurus was a herbivore dinosaur of the jurassic period. It had 
diamond shaped spiny plates on its back and spikes on its tail for 
defence against predators. 
 
Stelleroidea 
The stelleroidea are a class of phylum echinodermata. They are the 
starfishes and brittle stars. They have a five-rayed symmetry clearly 
indicated by "arms" which radiate out from the centre of the body. The 
mouth is on the lower side of the flattened body. 
 
Stentor 
Stentor is a member of the order of heterotricha. 
 
Stoat 
The stoat is a carnivorous mammal of the weasel family. 
 
Stomach 
The stomach is a region of the alimentary canal. Food accumulates in the 
stomach and some digestion may take place. 
 
Stork 
The stork is a carnivorous wading bird. 
 
Strawberry 
The strawberry is a low growing perennial of the rosaceae family. The 
fruit are rich in vitamin c.  
 
Sturgeon 
The sturgeon is a member of the palaeonisciformes order.  
 
Stylaster 
Stylaster is a member of the order stylasterina.  
 
Stylasterina 
Stylasterina is an order of marine hydrozoa similar to milleporina but 
with branched corallum.  
 
Stylonichia 
Stylonichia is a member of the order of hypotricha. 
 
Sub-phylum acrania 
The sub-phylum acrania group of animals are simple or aberrant chordates 
without a true brain, heart or kidneys.  
 
Sub-phylum cnidaria 
The sub-phylum cnidaria are coelenterates which have nematocysts and 
nearly perfect symmetry. 
 
Sub-phylum craniata 
Sub-phylum craniata are the vetebrate group of animals. They are 
chordates which show a very definite advance in complexity of structure 
and activity. A proper head region can be identified. Organs of special 
sense are prominently developed and there is a definite brain enclosed in 
a cranium. 
 
Sub-phylum ctenophora 
The sub-phylum ctenophora are a family of solitary, free swimming 
animals. They have characteristic locomotor structures formed of rows of 
fused cilia. 
 
Suctoria 
Suctoria are a subclass of ciliophora. The adult form has suctorial 
tentacles.  
 
Sus 
see "Pig" 
 
Swallow-wort 
see "Celandine" 
 
Swan 
The swan is a large, long necked bird of the duck family. 
 
Swede 
Swede is a biennial plant.  
 
Sweet Flag 
see "Calamus" 
 
Swine 
see "pig" 
 
Swiss stone pine 
see "Cembra_pine" 
 
Sycamore 
The sycamore is a tree native to Europe.  
 
Sycon 
Sycon is a member of the calcarea class.  
 
Synapsida 
The synapsida are a subclass of mammal-like reptiles now extinct. 
 
Synapta 
Synapta is a type of holothuroidea. 
 
Syncarida 
Syncarida is an order of malacostraca in which the carapace is absent and 
the thoracic appendages have exopodites.  
 
Syndactyla 
The syndactyla are an order of metatheria in which the second and third 
toes are bound together in a common mass of tissue. 
 
Taenia 
Taenia is a cestoda.  
 
Taipan 
The taipan is a type of small headed cobra. 
 
Talbot 
The talbot was a large, whitish hound with long hanging ears and heavy 
jaws bred for tacking and hunting. It is believed that the talbot was the 
forerunner of the modern bloodhound. 
 
Tamaricaceae 
Tamaricaceae is a small natural order of polypetalous exogens. The 
species are either herbs or shrubs, inhabiting chiefly the basin of the 
Mediterranean. They have minute alternate simple leaves and usually small 
white or pink flowers in terminal spikes.  
 
Tamarin 
The tamarin are South American monkeys. They are active and restless. 
 
Tamarind 
Tamarind is an evergreen tree of the leguminosae family.  
 
Tamarisk 
The Tamarisk is a plant of the genus Tamarix. It is a graceful evergreen 
shrub or small tree with slender feathery branches and minute leaves 
found in sandy places.  
 
Tanaidacea 
Tanaidacea is a marine order of malacostraca with a reduced carapace and 
a short abdomen. 
 
Tangerine 
The tangerine is a small, flattened, deep-coloured, swett-scented variety 
of orange from Tangier. 
 
Tangle 
Tangle is a popular name for Laminaria digitata, a common British sea-
weed. 
 
Tank-worm 
The tank-worm is a nematode worm found in mud in water tanks in India.  
 
Tanrec 
Tanrec (Centetes) is a genus of insectivorous mammals resembling the 
European hedgehog in appearance. They are found in Madagascar where they 
live in burrows excavated with their strong claws.  
 
Tantalus 
Tantalus is a genus of wading birds of the heron family.  
 
Tapir 
Tapir is the name of ungulate or hoofed animals forming the family 
Tapiridae. The nose resembles a short fleshy proboscis. There are four 
toes to the fore-feet and three to the hind-feet. 
 
Tara Fern 
The Tara Fern is a species of fern found in New Zealand. The Maoris 
obtained a flour from its root which formed a staple part of their diet 
prior to British settlement.  
 
Tarantula 
The tarantula is a large black south European spider of the genus Lycosa 
with a slighly poisonous bite. The term is also popularly applied to 
various other large, especially hairy spiders from Africa and America.  
 
Tare 
Tare is the popular name for plants of the genus Vicia. 
 
Taro 
Taro is a plant of the arum family cultivated in Pacific islands for its 
starchy, edible root.  
 
Tarpan 
The tarpan is a breed of wild horse found in Asia.  
 
Tarpon 
The tarpon is a large silvery marine fish found in the warmer waters of 
the western Atlantic. 
 
Tarragon 
Tarragon is a perennial herb of the daisy family. 
 
Tarsier 
The tarsier (Tarsius) is a genus of mammals of the lemur family. It is 
about the size of a squirrel, fawn brown in colour with large eyes, large 
ears and a long tufted tail. The tarsier is a tree dwelling animal and 
eats lizards. 
 
Tarsius 
see "Tarsie" 
 
Tasmanian wolf 
see "Thylacine" 
 
Tasmannia 
Tasmannia is a genus of one Tasmanian and two Australian shrubs of the 
natural order Magnoliaceae.  
 
Tatouay 
The tatouay is a kind of armadillo remarkable for the undefended state of 
its tail which is devoid of the bony rings that inclose it in other 
armadillos. 
 
Tautog 
The tautog (Tautoga nigra) is an American fish found on the coast of New 
England and valued as a food.  
 
Taxaceae 
Taxaceae is a sub order of Coniferae which includes the Yew tree. 
 
Taxodium 
Taxodium is a genus of plants of the order Coniferae. It includes the 
cypresses.  
 
Taxus 
see "Yew" 
 
Tayra 
The tayra (Galera barbara) is a South American carnivorous animal allied 
to the glutton. It is black in colour with a large white patch on the 
breast.  
 
Tea 
Tea is an evergreen rosaceae. The infusion of the dried leaves is a 
popular beverage. It was introduced to England during the 17th century. 
 
Teak 
Teak is a tropical Asian timber tree. 
 
Teal 
The teal is a small British duck of the genus Querquedula.  
 
Teasel 
The teasel is a plant of the genus Dipsacus. It is a herb with prickly 
leaves and flower heads. 
 
Tecoma 
Tecoma is a genus of plants of the natural order Bignoniaceae. They are 
trees or shrubs or climbing plants with unequally pinnate or digitate 
simple leaves, and terminal panicles of dusky red or orange flowers.  
 
Tectibranchiata 
Tectibranchiata is a division of gasteropodous mollusca with gills 
protected by the shell or the mantle, as with the sea-hare.  
 
Teff 
Teff (Eragrostis abyssinica) is a grain with seeds about the size of 
those of millet. 
 
Teguexin 
The teguexin is a species of lizard inhabiting tropical America. They 
grow to around 150cm long and can swim with ease and rapidity.  
 
Teledu 
The teledu is a stinking badger found in Java and Sumatra.  
 
Teleostei 
Teleostei is a large sub-class of fish distinguished by a bony skeleton.  
 
Telosporidia 
Telosporidia are a subclass of sporozoa. They have a trophic stage which 
is distinct from the reproductive phase. 
 
Tench 
The tench (Tinca tinca) is a freshwater fish of the carp family.  
 
Tenebrio 
Tenebrio is a genus of beetles. 
 
Tenuirostres 
Tenuirostres (slender-beaked) is a section of the Insessores order of 
birds containing those species with a long slender, tapering beak.  
 
Terebratula 
Terebratula is a deep-sea genus of phylum brachiopoda.  
 
Termite 
Termites are a social insect of the order Isoptera. They are chiefly 
found in tropical climates and are very destructive to timber. 
 
Tern 
The tern is a sea bird, especially those of the genus Sterna. They 
resemble a gull, but are usualy smaller and with a more slender body. 
Terns have long, pointer wings and a forked tail giving rise to their 
alternative name of the sea-swallow. 
 
Ternstroemiaceae 
Ternstroemiaceae is a natural order of polypetalous dicotyledonous plants 
consisting of trees or shrubs with alternate simple usually coriacerous 
leaves without stipules. The flowers are generally white, arranged in 
axillary or terminal peduncles, articulated at the base.  
 
Terrapin 
The terrapin is a freshwater tortoise.  
 
Testes 
The testes are the male gonads. 
 
Tetradactyl 
Tetradactyl is a term applied to any animal or bird with 4 fingers or 
toes. 
 
Tetraonidae 
see "Grouse" 
 
Tetrapod 
Tetrapod is the family of four legged vertebrates. It includes birds 
because wings developed from legs. 
 
Thalamophora 
The thalamophora are an order of rhizopoda. They are amoeboid forms 
protected by a shell. There are apertures in the shell through which the 
pseudopodia extend.  
 
Thallophyte 
A thallophyte is a plant with a thallus body, such as seaweed or 
liverwort. 
 
Thallus 
A thallus is the body of a primitive plant which is not divided into 
leaves, stem and roots but consists of a more or less uniform tissue.  
 
Thrasher 
The thrasher is a species of shark (Alopias vulpinus) which has a very 
long upper division of its tail which it uses to thrash its prey or 
attackers. 
 
Thrips 
Thrips are minute insects with 4 hair-fringed wings of the order 
Thysanoptera. Many of the species injure plants by feeding upon their 
juices.  
 
Thrush 
The thrush is a bird of the turdidae family.  
 
Thylacine 
The thylacine (Tasmanian wolf, Thylacinus cynocephalus) is a carnivorous 
marsupial resembling a dog in appearance, greyish-brown with conspicuous 
black markings on the hinder half of the back.  
 
Thyme 
Thyme is a herb of the labiatae family. 
 
Thysanozoon 
Thysanozoon is a member of the order polycladida. 
 
Thysanura 
Thysanura is an order of apterygota.  
 
Tick 
see "acarina" 
 
Tiger 
The tiger is a large asian wild cat. It is maneless, of tawny-yellow 
colour with blackish transverse stripes and a white belly. 
 
Tigress 
A tigress is a female tiger.  
 
Tile-fish 
The tile-fish (Lopholatilus chamaeleonticeps) is a large, deep-water, 
yellow-spotted fish found off the coast of New England. It is apparently 
good to eat. 
 
Tinamou 
The tinamou is a South American bird of the family Tinamidae. It 
resembles the grouse but is actualy related to the rhea. 
 
Tinamous 
The Tinamous are a unique group of birds. They are about the size of a 
fowl with a small head and slender neck. 
 
Toad 
The toad is a tailless leaping amphibian similar to the frog, but 
terrestial in habits except at the breeding season. 
 
Toads 
see "toad" 
 
Tobacco 
Tobacco is a large leaved solanaceae plant of the genus Nicotiana.  
 
Tody 
The tody is a small insectivorous West Indian bird of the genus Todus, 
allied to the kingfisher.  
 
Tonka 
The tonka is a large South American tree (Dipteryx odorata). The seeds, 
known as tonka beans, are black fragrant and almond-shaped and are used 
for scenting tobacco and perfume. 
 
Tope 
The tope (Galeorhinus galeus) is a small european shark.  
 
Tortoise 
The tortoise is a chelonia. 
 
Totara 
The totara is a tree found in New Zealand and Chile.  
 
Toucan 
The toucan is a bird found in South and Central America forests.  
 
Trachea 
The trachea is a pipe leading to the lung chamber.  
 
Trachylina 
Trachylina is an order of hydrozoa. They are mainly marine forms in which 
the medusoid stage is represented, and the hydroid stage is reduced or 
absent.  
 
Tragopan 
The tragopan is an asiatic pheasant of the genus Tragopan. The male has 
erectile fleshy horns on his head leading to its alternative name of the 
horned pheasant. 
 
Tree 
A tree is a perennial plant with a self supporting woody main stem. 
 
Trefoil 
A trefoil is a plant of the leguminosae family with leaves that appear to 
be divided into 3 lobes.  
 
Trematoda 
Trematoda is a class of phylum platyhelminthes. They are the fluke worms. 
Parasitic flat worms with a leaf-like body. The mesenchyme secretes a 
tough cuticle and cilia are lacking in the adults. Hooks and/or suckers 
are often present.  
 
Trematode 
A trematode is any member of the Trematoda. 
 
Triceratops 
The triceratops was a dinosaur with three horns on its head.  
 
Tricladida 
Tricladida is an order of turbellaria with an intestine having three main 
branches. The sense organs are frequently well developed. 
 
Trout 
The trout is a fish native to the northern hemisphere.  
 
Truffle 
Truffle is a subterranean fungus. 
 
Trypanosome 
Trypanosome is a parasite of the genus Trypanosoma. It is a flagellate 
protozoa which infects the blood of man and other animals often causing 
disease. 
 
Tsetse 
The tsetse is a fly found in Africa that carries sleeping sickness. 
 
Tuatara 
The tuatara is a survivor of the group of prehistoric reptiles to which 
the dinosaurs belonged. It is found only in a few islands of New Zealand. 
It lays 10-14 eggs which it buries in the ground. A fully grown tuatara 
is about 24 inches long. The tuatara is carnivorous.  
 
Tubifex 
The tubifex are oligochaeta.  
 
Tubularia 
Tubularia is a member of the order of gymnoblastea. 
 
Tulip 
The tulip is a liliaceae. 
 
Tuna 
The tuna is a fish of the mackerel family.  
 
Tunny 
The tunny is a fish of the mackerel family, also called tuna it can reach 
14ft in length. 
 
Tupelo 
The tupelo are large American trees of the genus Nyssa found growing in 
swamps and on river banks in the sourthern USA. 
 
Turaco 
The turaco is a long-tailed crested African bird of the genus Tauraco.  
 
Turbellaria 
Turbellaria is a class of free-living flatworms. They live in water and 
damp conditions. The epidermis is glandular, ciliated and has a thin 
cuticle. 
 
Turbot 
The turbot is a flat fish found in the mediterranean and north sea. 
 
Turmeric 
Turmeric is a perennial plant of the ginger family. 
 
Turnip 
The turnip is a biennial cruciferous plant with a fleshy globular or 
spheroidal root, toothed leaves, and yellow flowers. The root of the 
turnip is used as a vegetable and also fed to cattle and sheep. 
 
Turtle 
The turtle is an aquatic chelonia.  
 
Tyrannosaurus rex 
Tyrannosaurus rex was a carnivorous dinosaur from the cretaceous period. 
It was the largest of all the carnivorous dinosaurs. It was so big it 
could have eaten a human in one or two bites.  
 
Uakari 
The uakari is a monkey found in South America.  
 
Umbelliferae 
The umbelliferae is a family of plants which generally have flowers in 
regular compound umbells and fistular furrowal stems.  
 
Urochordata 
Urochordata is a class of sub-phylum acrania. They are the sea squirts. 
They are ciliary-feeding marine animals.  
 
Urodela 
The urodela are a subclass of amphibia. They are the newts and 
salamanders. The tail persists throughout life. The fore and hind limbs 
are poorly developed.  
 
Urticaceae 
Urticaceaeis a natural order of exogenous trees, herbs and shrubs. This 
is the nettle family, with stinging hairs.  
 
Vanilla 
Vanilla is a genus of climbing orchids. 
 
Velella 
Velella is a member of the order of siphonophora. 
 
Ventricle 
A ventricle is a chamber of the heart which despatches blood. 
 
Venus Fly-trap 
The Venus Fly-trap is a plant of the genus Dionoea. It is native to the 
sandy savannas of Carolina and Florida. The leaves have a dilated petiole 
and a slightly stalked 2-lobed lamina, with three short stiff bristles on 
each lobe. The bristles are remarkably irritable and when touched by a 
fly or other insect the lobes of the leaf suddenly close on the insect. 
The insect is then digested. 
 
Vertebrate 
see "sub-phylum_craniata" 
 
Vertebrates 
see "vertebrate" 
 
Vicia 
Vicia is a genus of leguminous plants extensively cultivated as food for 
cattle and horses. 
 
Vicuna 
The vicuna is a ruminant mammal of the camel family.  
 
Viper 
The viper is a family of venomous snakes. They are characterized by 
venom-conducting fangs which hinge forward when the snake bites.  
 
Visceral skeleton 
The visceral skeleton is the bones comprising the jaws and their allied 
structures. 
 
Vole 
The vole is a rodent of the cricetidae family.  
 
Vorticella 
Vorticella is a member of the order of peritricha.  
 
Vulture 
The vulture is a carrion eating bird. 
 
Wake-robin 
see "Green-dragon" 
 
Wallaby 
Wallaby is the name of several small members of the kangaroo family.  
 
Walrus 
The walrus is a marine mammal similar to the seal found in the arctic.  
 
Warbler 
The warbler is a family of song birds.  
 
Wart hog 
The wart hog is a type of wild pig found in Africa. 
 
Wasp 
The wasp is a stinging insect of the order hymenoptera. 
 
Water-pepper 
Water-pepper is a plant of the Polygonaceae family. It grows to between 
20 and 70 cm tall and has sparingly branched ascending stems. The leaves 
are lanceolate and irritate the skin when touched. 
 
Waterbuck 
The waterbuck is an antelope found in Africa. It has a characteristic 
white ring marKing in its rump. 
 
Watercress 
Watercress is a perennial aquatic plant rich in iron. 
 
Wax-Palm 
see "Ceroxylon" 
 
Waxbill 
The waxbill is a small seed eating bird found in Africa.  
 
Weasel 
The weasel is a carnivorous mammal of the family mustelidae. It feeds 
mainly on voles, rats and mice. 
 
Whale 
A whale is a large marine mammal of the order cetacea.  
 
Whelk 
The whelk is a marine gastropod with a thick spiral shell.  
 
Whin 
see "Gorse" 
 
Whistling Snipe 
see "Greenshank" 
 
Widow Bird 
The widow bird is several species of African weaver birds. They trick 
other birds into rearing their young. 
 
Wigeon 
The wigeon is a British duck. 
 
Wildebeeste 
see "Gnu" 
 
Willow 
Willow is an amentaceae of the family salicaceae. Its timber is used to 
make cricket bats.  
 
Witch-hazel 
see "Hamamelidaceae" 
 
Wolf 
The wolf is a wild dog. 
 
Wolf-fish 
see "Cat-fish" 
 
Wolverene 
see "Glutton" 
 
Wolverine 
see "Glutton" 
 
Wombat 
The wombat is a nocturnal, herbivorous marsupial. 
 
Wood-ibis 
Wood-ibis is an American bird of the Tantalus genus. It lives in swamps 
where it feeds on snakes, young alligators, frogs and other reptiles. 
 
Woodbine 
see "Honeysuckle" 
 
Woodcock 
The woodcock is a British game bird.  
 
Woodlice 
The woodlice are malacostraca.  
 
Wormwood 
Wormwood is a European woody herb (Artemisia absinthium). It yields a 
dark-green oil which was once used as a tonic against intestinal worms 
and as a protection against moths and fleas, and is now used as a 
flavouring in vermouth and absinthe. 
 
Wren 
The wren is a small brown bird with a cocked tail.  
 
Xanthorrhoea 
see "Grass-tree" 
 
Xiphosura 
Xiphosura are the king-crabs order of arachnida. They are aquatic animals 
with gill-books.  
 
Xylem 
Xylem is a woody tissue found in vascular plants. Its purpose is to 
conduct water and dissolved minerals from the root to the rest of the 
plant.  
 
Yak 
The yak is a wild ox found in Tibet.  
 
Yam 
The yam is a tropical plant, the tuba of which is eaten as a vegetable. 
 
Yarrow 
Yarrow is a perennial herb with a creeping rhizome and erect, furrowed 
and downy stems. Yarrow flowers between June and August, and is common 
throughout Europe and Asia. 
 
Yeast 
Yeast is a fungus.  
 
Yew 
The yew (taxus) is an evergreen tree of the family taxaceae. It was 
sacred to the ancient pagan religion of Britain.  
 
Yucca 
The yucca is a liliaceae. 
 
Zebra 
The zebra is a black and white striped wild horse found in Africa.  
 
Zoantharia 
Zoantharia is an order of anthozoa. They have simple tentacles occuring 
in multiples of six.  
 
Zoology 
Zoology is the science which deals with the structure, life-history, 
habits and activities of animals.  
 
Zoomastigina 
The zoomastigina are a subclass of mastigophora.  
  
THE WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE  
  
 
A midsummer night's dream 
A midsummer night's dream is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Athens and a wood not far from it. It opens in a room in the palace of 
Theseus. 
 
Aaron 
Aaron is a moor in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Abbot of Westminster 
The Abbot of Westminster is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Abhorson 
Abhorson is an executioner in Measure for Measure. 
 
Abram 
Abram is a servant to Montague in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Achilles 
Achilles is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Adam 
Adam is a servant to Oliver in As You Like It. 
 
Adrian 
Adrian is a lord in the tempest. 
 
Adriana 
Adriana is wife to Antipholus of Ephesus. 
 
Aegeon 
Aegeon is a merchant of Syracuse in the comedy of errors. 
 
Aemil Lepidus 
Aemil Lepidus is a character in Julius Caesar. 
Aemil Lepidus is a trimvir in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Aemilia 
Aemilia is wife to Aegeon. 
 
Aemilius 
Aemilius is a noble Roman in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Aeneas 
Aeneas is a Trojan commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Agamemnon 
Agamemnon is the Grecian general in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Agrippa 
Agrippa is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Ajax 
Ajax is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Alarbus 
Alarbus is a son to Tamora in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Alcibiades 
Alcibiades is an Athenian captain in Timon of Athens. 
 
Alexander 
Alexander is servant to Cressida. 
 
Alexander Iden 
Alexander Iden is a Kentish gentleman in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Alexas 
Alexas is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Alice 
Alice is a lady attending on Katharine in King Henry V. 
 
All's well that ends well 
All's well that ends well is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set 
partly in France and partly in tuscany. It opens in a room in the 
countesses palace in rousillon. 
 
Alonso 
Alonso is the King of Naples in the tempest. 
 
Amiens 
Amiens is a lord attending upon the exiled Duke in As You Like It. 
 
Andromache 
Andromache is wife to Hector in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Angelo 
Angelo is the deputy in Measure for Measure. 
Angelo is a goldsmith in the comedy of errors. 
 
Angus 
Angus is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Anne Bullen 
Anne Bullen is Queen Katharine's maid of honour in King Henry VIII. 
 
Anne Page 
Anne Page is the daughter of Page. She is in love with Fenton. 
 
Antenor 
Antenor is a Trojan commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Antigonus 
Antigonus is a lord of Sicilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Antiochus 
Antiochus is the King of Antioch in Pericles. 
 
Antipholus 
Antipholus is the name of two twin brother; Antipholus of Ephesus and 
Antipholus of Syracuse. They are sons of Aegeon and Aemilia. 
 
Antonio 
Antonio is the brother of Prospero. He is the usurping Duke of Milan. 
Antonio is the father of Proteus. 
Antonio is the brother of Leonato. 
Antonio is The Merchant of Venice. 
Antonio is a sea-captain and friend to Sebastian in twelfth-night. 
 
Antony and Cleopatra 
Antony and Cleopatra is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
several parts of the Roman empire. It opens in a room in Cleopatra's 
palace in alexandria. 
 
Apemantus 
Apemantus is a churlish philosopher in Timon of Athens. 
 
Archbisop of Canterbury 
The Archbisop of Canterbury is a character in King Henry V. 
 
Archibald 
Archibald is the Earl of Douglas in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Archidamus 
Archidamus is a lord of Bohemia in the winter's tale. 
 
Ariel 
Ariel is an airy spirit in the tempest. 
 
Artemidorus 
Artemidorus is a sophist of Cnidos in Julius Caesar. 
 
Arthur 
Arthur is Duke of Bretagne in King John. 
 
Arviragus 
Arviragus is son to Cymberline disguised under the name of Cadwal. 
 
As you like it 
As you like it is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set first near 
oliver's house; afterwards, in the usurper's court, and in the forest of 
Arden. It opens in an orchard near oliver's house whereupon enter orlando 
and adam. 
 
Audrey 
Audrey is a country wench in As You Like It. 
 
Autolycus 
Autolycus is a rogue in the winter's tale. 
 
Bagot 
Bagot is a creature to King Richard II. 
 
Balthasar 
Balthasar is servant to Romeo in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Balthazar 
Balthazar is a merchant in the comedy of errors. 
Balthazar is a servant to Don Pedro. 
Balthazar is a servant to Portia. 
 
Banquo 
Banquo is a general in the King's army in Macbeth. 
 
Baptista 
Baptista is a rich gentleman of Padua in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Bardolph 
Bardolph is a follower of Falstaff. 
Bardolph is a character in King Henry IV part 1 and in King Henry IV part 
II and in King Henry V. 
 
Barnardine 
Barnardine is a dissolute prisoner in Measure for Measure. 
 
Bassanio 
Bassanio is a friend to Antonio The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Basset 
Basset is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Bassianus 
Bassianus is brother to Saturnius in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Bastard of Orleans 
The bastard of Orleans is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Bates 
Bates is a soldier in King Henry V. 
 
Beatrice 
Beatrice is the niece of Leonato. 
 
Belarius 
Belarius is a banished lord disguised under the name of Morgan in 
Cymberline. 
 
Benedick 
Benedick is a young lord of Padua in much ado about nothing. 
 
Benvolio 
Benvolio is a friend to Romeo in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Bernardo 
Bernardo is an officer in Hamlet. 
 
Bertram 
Bertram is Count of Rousillon in all's well that ends well. 
 
Bianca 
Bianca is a daughter to Baptista. 
Bianca is mistress to Cassio in Othello. 
 
Biondello 
Biondello is a servant to Lucentio in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Biron 
Biron is a lord attending on Ferdinand in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Bishop of Carlisle 
The Bishop of Carlisle is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Bishop of Ely 
The Bishop of Ely is a character in King Henry V. 
 
Bishop of Lincoln 
The Bishop of Lincoln is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Blanch 
Blanch is the daughter of Alphonso King of Castile. 
 
Bolingbroke 
Bolingbroke is a conjurer in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Bona 
Bona is sister to the French Queen in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Borachio 
Borachio is a follower of John in much ado about nothing. 
 
Bottom 
Bottom is a weaver in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Boult 
Boult is servant to the pander in Pericles. 
 
Boyet 
Boyet is a lord attending on the Princess of France in Love's Labour's 
Lost. 
 
Brabantio 
Brabantio is a senator in Othello. 
 
Bull-calf 
Bull-calf is a recruit in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Bushy 
Bushy is a creature to King Richard II. 
 
Caius Lucius 
Caius Lucius is the general of the Roman forces in Cymberline. 
 
Caius Marcius 
Caius Marcius is a noble Roman in Coriolanus. 
 
Calchas 
Calchas is a Trojan priest taking part with the Greeks in Troilus and 
Cressida. 
 
Caliban 
Caliban is a savage and deformed slave in the tempest. 
 
Calphurnia 
Calphurnia is wife to Julius Caesar. 
 
Camillo 
Camillo is a lord of Sicilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Canidus 
Canidus is lieutenant-general to Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Caphis 
Caphis is a servant in Timon of Athens. 
 
Capucius 
Capucius is an ambassador from Charles V in King Henry VIII. 
 
Capulet 
Capulet is head of a house at variance with Montague in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Cardinal Beaufort 
Cardinal Beaufort is the Bishop of Winchester in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Cardinal Bourchier 
Cardinal Bourchier is the Archbishop of canterbury in King Richard III. 
 
Cardinal Campeius 
Cardinal Campeius is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Cardinal Pandulph 
Cardinal Pandulph is the pope's legate in King John. 
 
Cardinal Wolsey 
Cardinal Wolsey is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Casca 
Casca is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Cassandra 
Cassandra is daughter to Priam and a prophetess in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Cassio 
Cassio is lieutenant to Othello. 
 
Cassius 
Cassius is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Cathness 
Cathness is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Celia 
Celia is a daughter to frederick in As You Like It. 
 
Ceres 
Ceres is a spirit in the tempest. 
 
Cerimon 
Cerimon is a lord of Ephesus in Pericles. 
 
Charles 
Charles is a wrestler in As You Like It. 
Charles is the King of France in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Charles the sixth 
Charles the sixth is the King of France in King Henry V. 
 
Charmian 
Charmian is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Chatillon 
Chatillon is the ambassador from France in King John. 
 
Chiron 
Chiron is a son to Tamora in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Christopher Sly 
Christopher Sly is a character in the induction of the taming of the 
shrew. 
 
Christopher Urswick 
Christopher Urswick is a priest in King Richard III. 
 
Cicero 
Cicero is a senator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Cinna 
Cinna is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
Cinna is a poet in Julius Caesar. 
 
Claudio 
Claudio is a young gentleman in Measure for Measure. 
Claudio is a young lord of Florence in much ado about nothing. 
 
Claudius 
Claudius is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
Claudius is the King of Denmark in Hamlet. 
 
Cleomenes 
Cleomenes is a lord of Sicilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Cleon 
Cleon is governor of tharsus in Pericles. 
 
Cleopatra 
Cleopatra is Queen of egypt in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Clitus 
Clitus is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Cloten 
Cloten is the son of the Queen by a former husband in Cymbeline. 
 
Clown 
Clown is a servant to Olivia in twelfth-night. 
Clown is servant to Othello. 
 
Cobweb 
Cobweb is a fairy in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Cominius 
Cominius is a general agaianst the Volscians in Coriolanus. 
 
Conrade 
Conrade is a follower of John in much ado about nothing. 
 
Constance 
Constance is the mother of arthur in King John. 
 
Cordelia 
Cordelia is a daughter to King Lear. 
 
Corin 
Corin is a shepherd in As You Like It. 
 
Coriolanus 
Coriolanus is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set partly in Rome and 
partly in the territories of the Volscians and antiates. It opens in a 
street in Rome whereupon enter a company of mutinous citizens with 
staves, clubs and other weapons. 
 
Cornelius 
Cornelius is a courtier in Hamlet. 
Cornelius is a physician in Cymberline. 
 
Costard 
Costard is a clown in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Countess of Auvergne 
The countess of Auvergne is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Countess of Rousillon 
The countess of Rousillon is the mother to Bertram. 
 
Court 
Court is a soldier in King Henry V. 
 
Cranmer 
Cranmer is the Archbishop of Canterbury in King Henry VIII. 
 
Cressida 
Cressida is daughter to Calchas in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Cromwell 
Cromwell is servant to Wolsey in King Henry VIII. 
 
Curan 
Curan is a courtier in King Lear. 
 
Curio 
Curio is a gentleman attending on Orsino in twelfth-night. 
 
Curtis 
Curtis is a servant to Petruchio. 
 
Cymbeline 
Cymbeline is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set sometimes in 
Britain and sometimes in italy. It opens in the garden of Cymbeline's 
palace in Britain. 
Cymbeline is the King of Britain. 
 
Dardanius 
Dardanius is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Decius Brutus 
Decius Brutus is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Deiphobus 
Deiphobus is son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Demetrius 
Demetrius is a man in love with hermia in a midsummer night's dream. 
Demetrius is a son to Tamora in Titus Andronicus. 
Demetrius is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Dennis 
Dennis is a servant to Oliver in As You Like It. 
 
Dercetas 
Dercetas is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Desdemona 
Desdemona is daughter to Brabantio and wife to Othello. 
 
Diana 
Diana is the daughter of a widow of Florence in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
Diomedes 
Diomedes is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
Diomedes is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Dion 
Dion is a lord of Sicilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Dionyza 
Dionyza is wife to Cleon in Pericles. 
 
Doctor Butts 
Doctor Butts is the physician to the King in King Henry VIII. 
 
Doctor Caius 
Doctor Caius is a French physician in the Merry Wives of Windsor. 
 
Dogberry 
Dogberry is an officer in much ado about nothing. 
 
Dolabella 
Dolabella is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Domitius Enobarbus 
Domitius Enobarbus is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Don Adriano de Armado 
Don Adriano de Armado is a fantastical spaniard in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Don Pedro 
Don Pedro is the Prince of Arragon in much ado about nothing. 
 
Donalbain 
Donalbain is son of Malcolm in Macbeth. 
 
Dorcas 
Dorcas is a shepherdess in the winter's tale. 
 
Dromio 
Dromio is the name of two twin brothers; Dromio of Ephesus and Dromio of 
Syracuse. They are attendants on the two antipholuses in the comedy of 
errors. 
 
Duchess of Gloster 
The duchess of Gloster is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Duchess of York 
The duchess of York is a character in King Richard II. 
The duchess of York is the mother to King Edward IV in King Richard III. 
 
Duke 
The Duke is a character in As You Like It. 
 
Duke of Albany 
The Duke of Albany is a character in King Lear. 
 
Duke of Alencon 
The Duke of Alencon is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Duke of Aumerle 
The Duke of Aumerle is the son of Edmund of Langley in King Richard II. 
 
Duke of Austria 
The Duke of Austria is a character in King John. 
 
Duke of Bedford 
The Duke of Bedford is a brother to the King in King Henry V. 
The Duke of Bedford is uncle to the King in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Duke of Bourbon 
The Duke of Bourbon is a character in King Henry V. 
 
Duke of Buckingham 
The Duke of Buckingham is a character in King Henry VI part II and in 
King Richard III and in King Henry VIII. 
 
Duke of Burgundy 
The Duke of Burgundy is a character in King Henry V and in King Henry VI 
part I and in King Lear. 
 
Duke of Clarence 
The Duke of Clarence is a brother to the King in King Richard III. 
 
Duke of Cornwall 
The Duke of Cornwall is a character in King Lear. 
 
Duke of Exeter 
The Duke of Exeter is uncle to the King in King Henry V. 
The Duke of Exeter is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Duke of Florence 
The Duke of Florence is a character that appears in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
Duke of Gloster 
The Duke of Gloster is a brother of the King in King Henry V. 
The Duke of Gloster is uncle to the King in King Henry VI part I and in 
King Henry VI part II. 
The Duke of Gloster is a brother to the King in King Richard III. 
 
Duke of Milan 
The Duke of Milan is a character in the two gentlemen of Verona. 
 
Duke of Norfolk 
The Duke of Norfolk is a character in King Henry VI part III and in King 
Richard III and in King Henry VIII. 
 
Duke of Orleans 
The Duke of Orleans is a character in King Henry V. 
 
Duke of Somerset 
The Duke of Somerset is a character in King Henry VI part II and in King 
Henry VI part III. 
 
Duke of Suffolk 
The Duke of Suffolk is a character in King Henry VI part II and in King 
Henry VIII. 
 
Duke of Surrey 
The Duke of Surrey is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Duke of Venice 
The Duke of Venice is a character in The Merchant of Venice and in 
Othello. 
 
Duke of York 
The Duke of York is cousin to the King in King Henry V. 
 
Dull 
Dull is a constable in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Dumaine 
Dumaine is a lord attending on Ferdinand in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Duncan 
Duncan is King of Scotland in Macbeth. 
 
Earl Berkley 
Earl Berkley is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Earl of Cambridge 
The Earl of Cambridge is a conspirator in King Henry V. 
 
Earl of Gloster 
The Earl of Gloster is a character in King Lear. 
 
Earl of Kent 
The Earl of Kent is a character in King Lear. 
 
Earl of Northumberland 
The Earl of Northumberland is a character in King Richard II and in King 
Henry IV part II and in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Earl of Oxford 
The Earl of Oxford is a character in King Henry VI part III and in King 
Richard III. 
 
Earl of Pembroke 
The Earl of Pembroke is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Earl of Richmond 
The Earl of Richmond is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Earl of Salisbury 
The Earl of Salisbury is a character in King Richard II and in King Henry 
V and in King Henry VI part I and in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Earl of Suffolk 
The Earl of Suffolk is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Earl of Surrey 
The Earl of Surrey is a character in King Henry IV part II and in King 
Richard III and in King Henry VIII. 
 
Earl of Warwick 
The Earl of Warwick is a character in King Henry IV part II and in King 
Henry  V and in King Henry VI part I and in King Henry VI part II and in 
King Henry VI part III. 
 
Earl of Westmoreland 
The Earl of Westmoreland is a character in King Henry IV part 1 and in 
King Henry IV part II and in King Henry V and in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Earl Rivers 
Earl Rivers is the brother to King Edward's Queen in King Richard III. 
 
Edgar 
Edgar is the son of the Earl of Gloster in King Lear. 
 
Edmund 
Edmund is the Earl of Rutland in King Henry VI part III. 
Edmund is a bastard son to the Earl of Gloster in King Lear. 
 
Edmund Mortimer 
Edmund Mortimer is the Earl of March in King Henry IV part 1 and in King 
Henry VI part I. 
 
Edmund of Langley 
Edmund of Langley is the Duke of York in King Richard II. 
 
Edward 
Edward is a son of the King in King Henry VI part II and in King Henry VI 
part III. 
Edward is the Earl of March and afterwards King 
Edward IV in King Henry VI part III. 
Edward is the Prince of Wales in King Richard III 
 
Egeus 
Egeus is the father to Hermia. 
 
Eglamour 
Eglamour is an agent for Silvia in her escape. 
 
Elbow 
Elbow is a simple constable in Measure for Measure. 
 
Eleanor 
Eleanor is the Duchess of Gloster in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Elinor 
Elinor is the widow of King Henry II in King John. 
 
Elizabeth 
Elizabeth is Queen of King Edward IV in King Richard III. 
 
Emilia 
Emilia is a lady attending to Hermione. 
Emilia is wife to Iago in Othello. 
 
Eros 
Eros is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Escalus 
Escalus is an ancient Lord in Measure for Measure. 
Escalus is Prince of Verona in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Escanes 
Escanes is a lord of Tyre in Pericles. 
 
Euphronus 
Euphronus is an ambassador from Antony to Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Fabian 
Fabian is a servant to Olivia in twelfth-night. 
 
Falstaff 
Falstaff is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Fang 
Fang is a sheriff's officer in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Feeble 
Feeble is a recruit in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Fenton 
Fenton is a character in the Merry Wives of Windsor. 
 
Ferdinand 
Ferdinand is the son of the King of Naples in the tempest. 
Ferdinand is the King of Vavarre in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Flaminius 
Flaminius is servant to Timon in Timon of Athens. 
 
Flavius 
Flavius is steward to Timon in Timon of Athens. 
Flavius is a tribune in Julius Caesar. 
 
Fleance 
Fleance is son to Banquo in Macbeth. 
 
Florizel 
Florizel is the Prince of Bohemia in the winter's tale. 
 
Fluellen 
Fluellen is an officer in the King's army in King Henry V. 
 
Flute 
Flute is a bellows-mender in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Ford 
Ford is a gentleman dwelling at Windsor in the Merry Wives of Windsor. 
 
Fortinbras 
Fortinbras is the Prince of Norway in Hamlet. 
 
Francisca 
Francisca is a nun in Measure for Measure. 
 
Francisco 
Francisco is a lord in the tempest. 
Francisco is a soldier in Hamlet. 
 
Frederick 
Frederick is the brother of the Duke and usurper of the Duke's dominions 
in As You Like It. 
 
Friar John 
Friar John is a franciscan in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Friar Laurence 
Friar Laurence is a franciscan in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Froth 
Froth is a follish gentleman in Measure for Measure. 
 
Gadshill 
Gadshill is a character in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Gallus 
Gallus is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Gardiner 
Gardiner is the Bishop of Winchester in King Henry VIII. 
 
Geffrey Fitz-Peter 
Geffrey Fitz-Peter is Earl of Essex in King John. 
 
George 
George is a character in King Henry VI part III. He becomes the Duke of 
Clarence. 
 
Gertrude 
Gertrude is Queen of Denmark and mother to Hamlet. 
 
Goneril 
Goneril is a daughter to King Lear. 
 
Gonzalo 
Gonzalo is an honest old counsellor in the tempest. 
 
Gower 
Gower is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
Gower is an officer in the King's army in King Henry V. 
 
Grandpre 
Grandpre is a French Lord in King Henry V. 
 
Gratiano 
Gratiano is a friend to Antonio The Merchant of Venice. 
Gratiano is brother to Brabantio in Othello. 
 
Green 
Green is a creature to King Richard II. 
 
Gregory 
Gregory is a servant to Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Gremio 
Gremio is a suitor to Bianca. 
 
Griffith 
Griffith is gentleman-usher to Queen Katharine in King Henry VIII. 
 
Grumio 
Grumio is a servant to Petruchio. 
 
Guiderius 
Guiderius is a son to Cymberline disguised under the name Polydore. 
 
Guildenstern 
Guildenstern is a courtier in Hamlet. 
 
Hamlet 
Hamlet is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in Denmark. It opens 
at a platform before the castle in Elsinore where Francisco is on his 
post and whereupon enter Bernardo. 
Hamlet is the Prince of Denmark in the play. 
 
Harcourt 
Harcourt is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Hector 
Hector is son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Helen 
Helen is wife of Menelaus in Troilus and Cressida. 
Helen is a woman to Imogen in Cymbeline. 
 
Helena 
Helena is a woman in love with demetrius in a midsummer night's dream. 
Helena is a gentlewoman protected by the countess in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
Helenus 
Helenus is son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Helicanus 
Helicanus is a lord of Tyre in Pericles. 
 
Henry 
Henry is the Prince of Wales and son of King Henry IV in King Henry IV 
part 1 and in King Henry IV part II. 
Henry is the Earl of Richmond, a youth in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Henry Beaufort 
Henry Beaufort is the Bishop of Winchester in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Henry Bolingbroke 
Henry Bolingbroke is the Duke of Hereford in King Richard II. 
 
Henry Percy 
Henry Percy is the son of the Earl of Northumberland in King Richard II 
and in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Hermia 
Hermia is a woman in love with Lysander. 
 
Hermione 
Hermione is Queen to Leontes in the winter's tale. 
 
Hero 
Hero is the daughter of Leonato. 
 
Hippolyta 
Hippolyta is Queen of the Amazons in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Holofernes 
Holofernes is a schoolmaster in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Horatio 
Horatio is a friend to Hamlet. 
 
Hortensio 
Hortensio is a suitor to Bianca. 
 
Hortensius 
Hortensius is a servant in Timon of Athens. 
 
Hotspur 
Hotspur is a son to Henry Percy in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Hubert de Burgh 
Hubert de Burgh is chamberlain to King John. 
 
Hume 
Hume is a priest in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Iago 
Iago is Othello's ancient. 
 
Imogen 
Imogen is the daughter to Cymbeline by a former Queen. 
 
Iras 
Iras is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Iris 
Iris is a spirit in the tempest. 
 
Isabel 
Isabel is the Queen of France in King Henry V. 
 
Isabella 
Isabella is the sister of Claudio. 
 
Jack Cade 
Jack Cade is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
James Gurney 
James Gurney is servant to lady Faulconbridge in King John. 
 
Jamy 
Jamy is an officer in the King's army in King Henry V. 
 
Jaquenetta 
Jaquenetta is a country wench in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Jaques 
Jaques is a lord attending upon the exiled Duke in As You Like It. 
Jaques is a son of Sir Rowland de Bois in As You Like It. 
 
Jessica 
Jessica is the daughter of Shylock. 
 
Joan la Pucelle 
Joan la Pucelle is a character in King Henry VI part I. She is commonly 
called Joan of Arc. 
 
John 
John is the bastard brother of Don Pedro. 
 
John Beaufort 
John Beaufort is the Earl of Somerset in King Henry VI part I. 
 
John Morton 
John Morton is the Bishop of Ely in King Richard III. 
 
John of Gaunt 
John of Gaunt is the Duke of Lancaster in King Richard II. 
 
John Talbot 
John Talbot is the son of Talbot in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Julia 
Julia is the beloved of Proteus. 
 
Juliet 
Juliet is the beloved of Claudio in Measure for Measure. 
Juliet is the daughter of Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Julius Caesar 
Julius Caesar is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set during a great 
part of the play at Rome: afterwards at sardis, and near philippi. It 
opens in a street in Rome. 
 
Junius Brutus 
Junius Brutus is a tribune of the people in Coriolanus. 
 
Juno 
Juno is a spirit in the tempest. 
 
Katharina 
Katharina is a daughter to Baptista. 
 
Katharine 
Katharine is a lady attending on the Princess of France in Love's 
Labour's Lost. 
Katharine is the daughter of Charles and Isabel in King Henry V. 
 
King Edward IV 
King Edward IV is a character in King Richard III. 
 
King Henry IV part I 
King Henry IV part I is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
England and opens in an apartment in the palace in London. 
 
King Henry IV part II 
King Henry IV part II is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
England and opens in warkworth before Northumberland's castle where upon 
enter rumour painted full of tongues. 
 
King Henry V 
King Henry V is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in England and 
France. It opens with a chorus and then in an ante-chamber in the King's 
palace in 
London. 
 
King Henry VI part I 
King Henry VI part I is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set partly 
in England and partly in France. It opens in Westminster abbey with the 
funeral of King Henry V. 
 
King Henry VI part II 
King Henry VI part II is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
various parts of England and opens in a room of state in the palace in 
londom. 
 
King Henry VI part III 
King Henry VI part III is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
France during the 3rd act and in England the rest of the play. It opens 
in the parliament-house in London to the sound of drums and some 
soldier's of the Duke of York's party breaKing in. 
 
King Henry VIII 
King Henry VIII is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set chiefly in 
London and Westminster; once at kimbolton. It opens following a prologue 
in an ante-chamber in the palace in London. 
King Henry VIII is the title character in the play. 
 
King John 
King John is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set sometimes in 
England and sometimes in France. It opens in a room of state in the 
palace in northampton. 
 
King Lear 
King Lear is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in Britain and 
opens in a room of state in King Lear's palace whereupon enter the Earl 
of kent, Earl of Gloster and edmund. 
 
King of France 
The King of France is a character that appears in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
King Richard II 
King Richard II is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set dispersedly 
in England and Wales. It opens in a room in the palace in London 
whereupon enter King Richard attended by John of gaunt and other nobles 
with him. 
 
King Richard III 
King Richard III is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in England 
and opens in a London street whereupon enter the Duke of Gloster. 
 
Lachimo 
Lachimo is a friend to Philaro in Cymberline. 
 
Lady anne 
Lady anne is the widow of Edward Prince of Wales in King Richard III. 
 
Lady Capulet 
Lady Capulet is the wife to Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Lady Faulconbridge 
Lady Faulconbridge is a character in King John. 
 
Lady Grey 
Lady Grey is a character and afterwards Queen to Edward IV in King Henry 
VI part III. 
 
Lady Macbeth 
Lady Macbeth is Macbeth's wife. 
 
Lady Macduff 
Lady Macduff is Macduff's wife in Macbeth. 
 
Lady Montague 
Lady Montague is the wife to Montague in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Lady Mortimer 
Lady Mortimer is the wife to Mortimer in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Lady Northumberland 
Lady Northumberland is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Lady Percy 
Lady Percy is the wife to Hotspur and sister to Mortimer in King Henry IV 
part 1 and in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Laertes 
Laertes is son of Polonius in Hamlet. 
 
Lafeu 
Lafeu is an old lord in all's well that ends well. 
 
Launce 
Launce is a clownish servant to Proteus. 
 
Launcelot Gobbo 
Launcelot Gobbo is a clown in The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Lavinia 
Lavinia is daughter to Titus Andronicus. 
 
Le beau 
Le beau is a courtier in As You Like It. 
 
Lenox 
Lenox is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Leonardo 
Leonardo is a servant to Bassanio. 
 
Leonato 
Leonato is the governor of Messina in much ado about nothing. 
 
Leonatus Posthumus 
Leonatus Posthumus is the husband to Imogen in Cymberline. 
 
Leonine 
Leonine is servant to Dionyza in Pericles. 
 
Leontes 
Leontes is the King of Scilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Lewis 
Lewis is the dauphin in King John and in King Henry V. 
 
Lewis XI 
Lewis XI is the King of France in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Ligarius 
Ligarius is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Lodovico 
Lodovico is kinsman to Brabantio in Othello. 
 
Longaville 
Longaville is a lord attending on Ferdinand in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Lord Abergavenny 
Lord Abergavenny is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Lord Bardolph 
Lord Bardolph is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Lord Clifford 
Lord Clifford is a character in King Henry VI part II and in King Henry 
VI part III. 
 
Lord Fitzwater 
Lord Fitzwater is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Lord Grey 
Lord Grey is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Lord Hastings 
Lord Hastings is a character in King Henry IV part II and in King Henry 
VI part III and in King Richard III. 
 
Lord Lovel 
Lord Lovel is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Lord Mowbray 
Lord Mowbray is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Lord Rivers 
Lord Rivers is brother to lady grey in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Lord Ross 
Lord Ross is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Lord Sands 
Lord Sands is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Lord Say 
Lord Say is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Lord Scales 
Lord Scales is the governor of the tower in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Lord Scroop 
Lord Scroop is a conspirator in King Henry V. 
 
Lord Stafford 
Lord Stafford is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Lord Stanley 
Lord Stanley is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Lord Willoughby 
Lord Willoughby is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Lorenzo 
Lorenzo is a character in love with Jessica in The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Love's labour's lost 
Love's labour's lost is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Navarre. It opens in a park with a palace in it whereupon enter 
Ferdinand, Biron, Longaville and Dumaine. 
 
Luce 
Luce is the servant to Adriana. 
 
Lucentio 
Lucentio is the son of Vincentio in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Lucetta 
Lucetta is a waiting-woman to Julia. 
 
Luciana 
Luciana is the sister of Adriana. 
 
Lucilius 
Lucilius is a character in Julius Caesar. 
 
Lucillius 
Lucillius is servant to Timon in Timon of Athens. 
 
Lucio 
Lucio is a fantastic in Measure for Measure. 
 
Lucius 
Lucius is a son to Titus Andronicus. 
Lucius is a flattering lord in Timon of a thens. 
Lucius is a servant in Timon of Athens. 
Lucius is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Lucullus 
Lucullus is a flattering lord in Timon of Athens. 
 
Lychorida 
Lychorida is nurse to Marina in Pericles. 
 
Lysander 
Lysander is a man in love with Hermia in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Lysimachus 
Lysimachus is governor of Mitylene in Pericles. 
 
Macbeth 
Macbeth is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in the end of the 
fourth act in England; through the rest of the play in Scotland. It opens 
in an open place with thunder and lightning, whereupon enter 3 witches. 
Macbeth is the title character in the play. He is a general in the King's 
army. 
 
Macduff 
Macduff is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Macmorris 
Macmorris is an officer in the King's army in King Henry V. 
 
Malcolm 
Malcolm is son of Duncan in Macbeth. 
 
Malvolio 
Malvolio is steward to Olivia in twelfth-night. 
 
Mamillius 
Mamillius is a young Prince of Sicilia in the winter's tale. 
 
Marcellus 
Marcellus is an officer in Hamlet. 
 
Marcius 
Marcius is son to Coriolanus. 
 
Marcus Antonius 
Marcus Antonius is a character in Julius Caesar. 
 
Marcus Brutus 
Marcus Brutus is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Mardian 
Mardian is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Margarelon 
Margarelon is a bastard son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Margaret 
Margaret is a gentlewoman attending on Hero. 
Margaret is the daughter to Reignier in King Henry VI part I. 
Margaret is the Queen to King Henry VI part II. 
Margaret is widow of King Henry VI in King Richard III. 
 
Margery Jourdain 
Margery Jourdain is a witch in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Maria 
Maria is a lady attending on the Princess of France in Love's Labour's 
Lost. 
Maria is Olivia's woman in twelfth-night. 
 
Mariana 
Mariana is the betrothed to Angelo. 
Mariana is a neighbour and friend to the widow in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
Marina 
Marina is daughter to Pericles and Thaisa in Pericles. 
 
Mark Antony 
Mark Antony is a trimvir in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Marquess of Dorset 
The Marquess of Dorset is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Marquess of Montague 
The Marquess of Montague is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Martius 
Martius is a son to Titus Andronicus 
 
Marullus 
Marullus is a tribune in Julius Caesar. 
 
Mayor of London 
The mayor of London is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Mayor of York 
The mayor of York is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Measure for measure 
Measure for measure is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Vienna. It opens at an apartment in the Duke's palace whereupon enter 
Duke, Escalus, lords and attendants. 
 
Mecaenas 
Mecaenas is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Melun 
Melun is a French lord in King John. 
 
Menas 
Menas is a friend of Pompey in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Menecrates 
Menecrates is a friend of Pompey in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Menelaus 
Menelaus is brother to Agamemnon. 
 
Menenius Agrippa 
Menenius Agrippa is a friend to Coriolanus. 
 
Menteth 
Menteth is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Mercade 
Mercade is a lord attending on the Princess of France in Love's Labour's 
Lost. 
 
Mercutio 
Mercutio is a friend of Romeo in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Merry Wives of Windsor 
The Merry Wives of Windsor is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Windsor and the adjacent parts. It opens in Windsor, before page's house 
whereupon enter justice shallow, slender and Sir Hugh Evans. 
 
Messala 
Messala is a character in Julius Caesar. 
 
Metellus Cimber 
Metellus Cimber is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Miranda 
Miranda is the daughter of Prospero. 
 
Mistress Ford 
Mistress Ford is the wife of Ford. 
 
Mistress Overdone 
Mistress Overdone is a bawd in Measure for Measure. 
 
Mistress Page 
Mistress Page is the wife of page. 
 
Mistress Quickly 
Mistress Quickly is a servant to doctor Caius. 
Mistress Quickly is the hostess of a tavern in Eastcheap in King Henry IV 
part 1. 
Mistress Quickly is a hostess in King Henry V. 
 
Montague 
Montague is the head of a house at variance with Capulet in Romeo and 
Juliet. 
 
Montano 
Montano is the governor of Cyprus in Othello. 
 
Montjoy 
Montjoy is a French herald in King Henry V. 
 
Mopsa 
Mopsa is a shepherdess in the winter's tale. 
 
Morton 
Morton is a retainer of the Earl of Northumberland in King Henry IV part 
II. 
 
Moth 
Moth is a page to Armado in Love's Labour's Lost. 
Moth is a fairy in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Mouldy 
Mouldy is a recruit in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Much ado about nothing 
Much ado about nothing is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Messina and opens before leonato's house whereupon enter leonato, hero, 
beatrice and others with a messenger. 
 
Mustard-seed 
Mustard-seed is a fairy in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Mutius 
Mutius is a son to Titus Andronicus. 
 
Nerissa 
Nerissa is the waiting-maid to Portia. 
 
Nestor 
Nestor is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Nym 
Nym is a follower of Falstaff and character in King Henry V. 
 
Oberon 
Oberon is the King of the fairies in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Octavia 
Octavia is sister to Caesar and wife to mark Antony in Antony and 
Cleopatra. 
 
Octavius Caesar 
Octavius Caesar is a character in Julius Caesar. 
Octavius Caesar is a trimvir in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Old Gobbo 
Old Gobbo is the father of Launcelot Gobbo. 
 
Oliver 
Oliver is a son of Sir Rowland de Bois in As You Like It. 
 
Olivia 
Olivia is a rich countess in twelfth-night. 
 
Ophelia 
Ophelia is the daughter of Polonius. 
 
Orlando 
Orlando is a son of Sir Rowland de Bois in As You Like It. 
 
Orsino 
Orsino is the Duke of Illyria in twelfth-night. 
 
Osrick 
Osrick is a courtier in Hamlet. 
 
Oswald 
Oswald is steward to Goneril in King Lear. 
 
Othello 
Othello is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set for the first act, in 
vencie; during the rest of the play, at a sea-port in Cyprus. It opens in 
a street in Venice whereupon enter Roderigo and Iago. 
Othello is a noble moor in the service of the Ventian state. 
 
Page 
Page is a gentleman dwelling at Windsor in the Merry Wives of Windsor. 
 
Pandarus 
Pandarus is uncle to Cressida in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Panthino 
Panthino is a servant to Antonio in the two gentlemen of Verona. 
 
Paris 
Paris is son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
Paris is a young nobleman in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Parolles 
Parolles is a follower of Bertram. 
 
Patroclus 
Patroclus is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Paulina 
Paulina is wife to Antigonus in the winter's tale. 
 
Pease-blossom 
Pease-blossom is a fairy in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Perdita 
Perdita is daughter to Leontes and hermione. 
 
Pericles 
Pericles is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set dispersedly in 
various countries. It opens before the palace of Antioch with gower. 
Pericles is the Prince of Tyre in the play. 
 
Peter 
Peter is a friar in Measure for Measure. 
Peter is a servant to Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Peter of Pomfret 
Peter of Pomfret is a character in King John. 
 
Peto 
Peto is a character in King Henry IV part 1 and in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Petruchio 
Petruchio is a gentleman of Verona in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Phebe 
Phebe is a shepherdess in As You Like It. 
 
Philario 
Philario is a friend to Posthumus in Cymberline. 
 
Philemon 
Philemon is servant to Cerimon in Pericles. 
 
Philip 
Philip is the King of France in King John. 
 
Philip Faulconbridge 
Philip Faulconbridge is a character in King John. 
 
Philo 
Philo is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Philostrate 
Philostrate is master of the revels to Theseus. 
 
Philotus 
Philotus is a servant in Timon of Athens. 
 
Phrynia 
Phrynia is a mistress to Alcibiades in Timon of Athens. 
 
Pinch 
Pinch is a schoolmaster in the comedy of errors. 
 
Pindarus 
Pindarus is a servant to Cassius in Julius Caesar. 
 
Pisanio 
Pisanio is servant to Posthumus in Cymberline. 
 
Pistol 
Pistol is a follower of Falstaff in King Henry IV part II. 
Pistol is a character in King Henry V. 
 
Poins 
Poins is a character in King Henry IV part 1 and in King Henry IV part 
II. 
 
Polixenes 
Polixenes is the King of Bohemia in the winter's tale. 
 
Polonius 
Polonius is lord chamberlain in Hamlet. 
 
Popilius Lena 
Popilius Lena is a senator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Portia 
Portia is a rich heiress in The Merchant of Venice. 
Portia is wife to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Priam 
Priam is the King of Troy in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Prince Henry 
Prince Henry is the son of King John. 
 
Prince Humphrey of Gloster 
Prince Humphrey of Gloster is a son to King Henry IV in King Henry IV 
part II. 
 
Prince John of Lancaster 
Prince John of Lancaster is a son of King Henry IV in King Henry IV part 
1 and in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Prince of Arragon 
The Prince of Arragon is a suitor to Portia. 
 
Prince of Morocco 
The prince of Morocco is a suitor to Portia. 
 
Proculeius 
Proculeius is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Prospero 
Prospero is the right Duke of Milan in the tempest. 
 
Proteus 
Proteus is a gentleman in the two gentlemen of Verona. 
 
Publius 
Publius is son to Marcus Andronicus in Titus Andronicus. 
Publius is a senator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Puck 
Puck is a fairy in a midsummer night's dream. He is also called Robin 
Good-Fellow. 
 
Queen Katharine 
Queen Katharine is wife to King Henry in King Henry VIII. 
 
Queen Margaret 
Queen Margaret is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Quince 
Quince is a carpenter in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Quintus 
Quintus is a son to Titus Andronicus 
 
Rambures 
Rambures is a French lord in King Henry V. 
 
Regan 
Regan is a daughter to King Lear. 
 
Reignier 
Reignier is the King of Naples in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Reynaldo 
Reynaldo is servant to Polonius in Hamlet. 
 
Richard 
Richard is a son of the King in King Henry VI part II. 
Richard is the Duke of York in King Richard III 
 
Richard Plantagenet 
Richard Plantagenet is the Duke of York in King Henry VI part I and in 
King Henry VI part II and in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Robert Bigot 
Robert Bigot is Earl of Norfolk in King John. 
 
Robert Faulconbridge 
Robert Faulconbridge is a character in King John. 
 
Robin 
Robin is a page to Falstaff. 
 
Roderigo 
Roderigo is a Venetian gentleman in Othello. 
 
Romeo 
Romeo is son to Montague in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Romeo and Juliet 
Romeo and Juliet is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set during the 
great part of the play in Verona; once in the 5th act at mantua. It opens 
in a public place. 
 
Rosalind 
Rosalind is a daughter of the exiled Duke in As You Like It. 
 
Rosaline 
Rosaline is a lady attending on the Princess of France in Love's Labour's 
Lost. 
 
Rosencrantz 
Rosencrantz is a courtier in Hamlet. 
 
Rosse 
Rosse is a Scottish nobleman in Macbeth. 
 
Rugby 
Rugby is a servant to doctor Caius. 
 
Rumour 
Rumour is the presenter of King Henry IV part II. 
 
Salarino 
Salarino is a friend to Antonio The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Sampson 
Sampson is a servant to Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Saturnius 
Saturnius is the son to the late emperor of Rome in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Scarus 
Scarus is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Scroop 
Scroop is the Archbishop of York in King Henry IV part 1 and in King 
Henry IV part II. 
 
Sebastian 
Sebastian is the brother of Alonso. 
Sebastian is brother to Viola in twelfth-night. 
 
Seleucus 
Seleucus is an attendant on Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Sempronius 
Sempronius is a flattering lord in Timon of Athens. 
 
Servillius 
Servillius is servant to Timon in Timon of Athens. 
 
Sextus pompeius 
Sextus pompeius is a character in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Seyton 
Seyton is an officer serving on Macbeth. 
 
Shadow 
Shadow is a recruit in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Shallow 
Shallow is a country justice in the Merry Wives of Windsor and in King 
Henry IV part II. 
 
Shylock 
Shylock is a jew in The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Sicinius Velutus 
Sicinius Velutus is a tribune of the people in Coriolanus. 
 
Silence 
Silence is a country justice in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Silius 
Silius is an officer under Ventidius in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Silvia 
Silvia is the beloved of Valentine. 
 
Silvius 
Silvius is a shepherd in As You Like It. 
 
Simonides 
Simonides is King of Pentapolis in Pericles. 
 
Simpcox 
Simpcox is an imposter in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Simple 
Simple is a servant to Slender. 
 
Sir Andrew Ague-Cheek 
Sir Andrew Ague-Cheek is a character in twelfth-night. 
 
Sir Anthony Denny 
Sir Anthony Denny is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Sir Henry Guildford 
Sir Henry Guildford is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Sir Hugh Evans 
Sir Hugh Evans is a welsh parson in the Merry Wives of Windsor. 
 
Sir Hugh Mortimer 
Sir Hugh Mortimer is uncle to the Duke of York in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Sir Humphrey Stafford 
Sir Humphrey Stafford is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Sir James Blount 
Sir James Blount is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir James Tyrrel 
Sir James Tyrrel is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir John Coleville 
Sir John Coleville is a character in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Sir John Falstaff 
Sir John Falstaff is a character in the Merry Wives of Windsor and in 
King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Sir John Fastolfe 
Sir John Fastolfe is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Sir John Montgomery 
Sir John Montgomery is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Sir John Mortimer 
Sir John Mortimer is uncle to the Duke of York in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Sir John Somerville 
Sir John Somerville is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Sir John Stanley 
Sir John Stanley is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Sir Michael 
Sir Michael is a friend to the Archbishop of York in King Henry IV part 
1. 
 
Sir Nathaniel 
Sir Nathaniel is a curate in Love's Labour's Lost. 
 
Sir Nicholas Vaux 
Sir Nicholas Vaux is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Sir oliver mar-text 
Sir oliver mar-text is a vicar in As You Like It. 
 
Sir Pierce of Exton 
Sir Pierce of Exton is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Sir Richard Ratcliff 
Sir Richard Ratcliff is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir Robert Brakenbury 
Sir Robert Brakenbury is lieutenant of the tower in King Richard III. 
 
Sir Stephen Scroop 
Sir Stephen Scroop is a character in King Richard II. 
 
Sir Thomas Erpingham 
Sir Thomas Erpingham is an officer in the King's army in King Henry V. 
 
Sir Thomas Gargrave 
Sir Thomas Gargrave is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Sir Thomas Grey 
Sir Thomas Grey is a conspirator in King Henry V. 
 
Sir Thomas Lovell 
Sir Thomas Lovell is a character in King Henry VIII. 
 
Sir Thomas Vaughan 
Sir Thomas Vaughan is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir Toby Belch 
Sir Toby Belch is uncle to Olivia in twelfth-night. 
 
Sir Walter Blunt 
Sir Walter Blunt is a character in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Sir Walter Herbert 
Sir Walter Herbert is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir William Catesby 
Sir William Catesby is a character in King Richard III. 
 
Sir William Glansdale 
Sir William Glansdale is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Sir William Lucy 
Sir William Lucy is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Sir William Stanley 
Sir William Stanley is a character in King Henry VI part III. 
 
Siward 
Siward is general of the english forces in Macbeth. 
 
Slender 
Slender is a cousin to shallow. 
 
Snare 
Snare is a sheriff's oficer in King Henry IV part II. 
 
Snout 
Snout is a tinker in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Snug 
Snug is a joiner in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Solanio 
Solanio is a friend to Antonio The Merchant of Venice. 
 
Solinus 
Solinus is the Duke of Ephesus in the comedy of errors. 
 
Southwell 
Southwell is a priest in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Speed 
Speed is a clownish servant to Valentine. 
 
Starveling 
Starveling is a tailor in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Stephano 
Stephano is a drunken butler in the tempest. 
Stephano is a servant to Portia. 
 
Strato 
Strato is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Talbot 
Talbot is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Tamora 
Tamora is Queen of the Goths in Titus Andronicus. 
 
Taurus 
Taurus is lieutenant-general to Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Tempest 
The tempest is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set at sea and later 
on an island and opens on a ship at sea with a tempestuous noise of 
thunder and lightning, whereupon enter a ship-master and a boatswain. 
 
Thaisa 
Thaisa is daughter to Simonides in Pericles. 
 
Thaliard 
Thaliard is a lord of Antioch in Pericles. 
 
The comedy of errors 
The comedy of errors is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in 
Ephesus. It opens at a hall in the Duke's palace whereupon enter Solinus, 
Aegeon, gaoler, officers and other attendants. 
 
The merchant of Venice 
The merchant of Venice is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set partly 
at Venice and partly at Belmont. It opens in a street in Venice whereupon 
enter Antonio, Salarino and Solanio. 
 
The taming of the shrew 
The taming of the shrew is a play by Shakespeare. It is set sometimes in 
padua and sometimes in Petruchio's house in the country. It opens before 
an ale-house on a heath whereupon enter the hostess and sly. 
 
The winter's tale 
The winter's tale is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set sometimes 
in Sicilia and sometimes in Bohemia. It opens in an ante-chamber in 
Leontes' palace in Sicilia whereupon enter camillo and archidamus. 
 
Thersites 
Thersites is a deformed and scurrilous Grecian. 
 
Theseus 
Theseus is the Duke of Athens in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Thomas 
Thomas is a friar in Measure for Measure. 
Thomas is the Duke of Clarence and son of King Henry IV in King Henry IV 
part II. 
 
Thomas Beaufort 
Thomas Beaufort is the Duke of Exeter and great-uncle to the King in King 
Henry VI part I. 
 
Thomas Horner 
Thomas Horner is an armourer in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Thomas mowbray 
Thomas mowbray is the Duke of Norfolk in King Richard II. 
 
Thomas Percy 
Thomas Percy is the Earl of worcester in King Henry IV part 1. 
 
Thomas Rotherham 
Thomas Rotherham is the Archbishop of York in King Richard III. 
 
Thryeus 
Thryeus is a friend of Caesar in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Thurio 
Thurio is a foolish rival to Valentine. 
 
Timandra 
Timandra is a mistress to Alcibiades in Timon of Athens. 
 
Timon 
Timon is a noble Athenian in Timon of Athens. 
 
Timon of Athens 
Timon of Athens is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in Athens and 
the woods adjoining. It opens in a hall in Timon's house in Athens. 
 
Titania 
Titania is the Queen of the fairies in a midsummer night's dream. 
 
Titinius 
Titinius is a character in Julius Caesar. 
 
Titus 
Titus is a servant in Timon of Athens. 
 
Titus Andronicus 
Titus Andronicus is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in Rome and 
the country near it. It opens in Rome. 
Titus Andronicus is the title character in the play. 
 
Titus Lartius 
Titus Lartius is a general against the Volscians in Coriolanus. 
 
Touchstone 
Touchstone is a clown in As You Like It. 
 
Tranio 
Tranio is a servant to Lucentio in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Travers 
Travers is a retainer of the Earl of Northumberland in King Henry IV part 
II. 
 
Trebonius 
Trebonius is a conspirator in Julius Caesar. 
 
Trinculo 
Trinculo is a jester in the tempest. 
 
Troilus 
Troilus is son to Priam in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Troilus and Cressida 
Troilus and Cressida is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set in Troy 
and the Grecian camp. It opens in Troy before Priam's palace whereupon 
enter Troilus armed and pandarus. 
 
Tubal 
Tubal is a jew and friend to Shylock. 
 
Tullus aufidius 
Tullus aufidius is general of the Volscians in Coriolanus. 
 
Twelfth-night 
Twelfth-night is a play written by Shakespeare. It is also called what 
you will. It is set in a city in illyria; and the sea-coast near it. It 
opens in an apartment in the Duke's palace whereupon enter the Duke, 
curio, lords and musicians attending. 
 
Two gentlemen of Verona 
The two gentlemen of Verona is a play written by Shakespeare. It is set 
sometimes in Verona, sometimes in Milan and on the frontiers of mantua. 
It opens at an open place in Verona whereupon enter Valentine and 
Proteus. 
 
Tybalt 
Tybalt is nephew to lady Capulet in Romeo and Juliet. 
 
Ulysses 
Ulysses is a Grecian commander in Troilus and Cressida. 
 
Ursula 
Ursula is a gentlewoman attending on Hero. 
 
Valentine 
Valentine is a gentleman in the two gentlemen of Verona. 
Valentine is a gentleman attending on Orsino in twelfth-night. 
 
Valeria 
Valeria is a friend to Virgilla in Coriolanus. 
 
Varrius 
Varrius is a friend of Pompey in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Varro 
Varro is a servant to Brutus in Julius Caesar. 
 
Vaux 
Vaux is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Ventidius 
Ventidius is one of Timon's false friends in Timon of Athens. 
Ventidius is a friend of Mark Antony in Antony and Cleopatra. 
 
Verges 
Verges is an officer in much ado about nothing. 
 
Vernon 
Vernon is a character in King Henry VI part I. 
 
Vincentio 
Vincentio is the Duke in Measure for Measure. 
Vincentio is an old gentelman of Pisa in the taming of the shrew. 
 
Viola 
Viola is a woman in love with Orsino in twelfth-night. 
 
Violenta 
Violenta is a neighbour and friend to the widow in all's well that ends 
well. 
 
Virgilla 
Virgilla is wife to Coriolanus. 
 
Voltimand 
Voltimand is a courtier in Hamlet. 
 
Volumnia 
Volumnia is mother to Coriolanus. 
 
Volumnius 
Volumnius is a character in Julius Caesar. 
 
Walter Whitmore 
Walter Whitmore is a character in King Henry VI part II. 
 
Wart 
Wart is a recruit in King Henry IV part II. 
 
William 
William is a country fellow in love with Audrey in As You Like It. 
 
William Longsword 
William Longsword is Earl of salisbury in King John. 
 
William Mareshall 
William Mareshall is Earl of Pembroke in King John. 
 
William page 
William page is a boy. the son of page. 
 
Williams 
Williams is a soldier in King Henry V. 
 
Woodville 
Woodville is the lieutenant of the tower in King Henry VI part I. 
  
  
OTHER INFORMATION  
  
 
Ab 
Ab is the 11 month of the Jewish civil year.  
 
Aba 
An aba is a sack like garment worn by Arabs.  
 
Abacus 
An abacus is a counting frame.  
 
Abaft 
Abaft means towards the rear of a ship. 
 
Abbey 
An abbey is a body of monks or a monastic building. 
 
Abbreviate 
Abbreviate means make shorter.  
 
Abbreviation 
An abbreviation is a short form of a word or words. 
 
Abdicate 
Abdicate means to renounce one's thrown.  
 
Abdomen 
The abdomen is the part of a creature's body between diaphragm and 
pelvis.  
 
Abduct 
Abduct means to take away by force or fraud.  
 
Abecedarian 
The Abecedarian were the followers of Storck, a 16th century German 
Anabaptist. They were so called because they rejected all wordly 
knowledge including learning the alphabet. 
 
Aberration 
Aberration is another word for error. 
 
Ablution 
Ablution is ceremonial washing. 
 
Abnormal 
Abnormal means deviating from normal. 
 
Abode 
Abode is a place where something lives. 
 
Abomasum 
An abomasum is the fourth stomach of a ruminant.  
 
Abort 
Abort means to terminate early. 
 
Abortion 
Abortion is the expulsion of the foetus from the uterus.  
 
Aboulia 
In psychology aboulia is the loss of will.  
 
Abracadabra 
Abbracadabra is a qabbalistic magic word. 
 
Abrasion 
An abrasion is a sore place on the skin caused by rubbing.  
 
Abridge 
Abridge means to shorten by condensing. 
 
Abscess 
An abscess is a pus filled infection of an animal.  
 
Abseil 
In mountaineering abseil means to descend using a rope. 
 
Absinth 
Absinth is a strong alcoholic drink containing from 60 to 80 percent 
alcohol. It contains wormwood oil which gives it its distinctive taste, 
but also toxic qualities.  
 
Abstract 
Abstract means theoretical rather than practical. 
 
Acceleration 
Acceleration is the rate at which a moving body increases in velocity.  
 
Accelerator 
An accelerator is a device for increasing speed.  
 
Accelerometer 
An accelerometer is an apparatus, either mechanical or electromechanical, 
for measuring acceleration or deceleration - that is, the rate of 
increase or decrease in the velocity of a moving object. Accelerometers 
are used to measure the efficiency of the braking systems on road and 
rail vehicles; those used in aircraft and spacecraft can determine 
accelerations in several directions simultaneously. There are also 
accelerometers for detecting vibrations in machinery. 
 
Accent 
An accent is a local mode of pronunciation in speech. 
 
Accolade 
An accolade is a gentle blow on the shoulders with the flat of a sword 
given by a Sovereign or his representative in conferring knighthood to 
the recipient.  
 
Accomplice 
An accomplice is someone associated with somebody else in the commiting 
of a crime. 
 
Accordion 
An accordion is a small portable musical instrument with a keyboard and 
bellows. It was invented by Damian in 1829. 
 
Accounts 
Accounts are a statement of income and expenditure. 
 
Accumulator 
In electrical terms, an accumulator stores electrical energy. 
 
Ace 
An ace is a playing card with one pip. 
In tennis terms an ace is a non-returnable serve.  
 
Acetal 
Acetal is a colourless liquid formed by oxidation of alcohol. 
 
Acetic acid 
Acetic acid is an organic acid with the formulae ch3cooh. 
 
Acetone 
Acetone is a colourless liquid with the formulae ch2coch3.  
 
Acetylene 
Acetylene is a highly inflammable gas of the hydrocarbon family used for 
welding and cutting metals.  
 
Achor 
Achor is (was?) a disease of infants, in which the head, face and breast 
become incrusted with thin, yellowish or greenish scabs. 
 
Acid 
An acid is a chemical compound that reacts with metals to form salts by 
releasing hydrogen. 
 
ACK 
In telecommunications, ACK is the "acknowledge" character in many data 
codes; used most commonly for an affirmative response of correct receipt.  
 
Aclinic 
The aclinic is a magnetic equator.  
 
Acne 
Acne is a skin eruption due to inflammation of the sebaceous glands.  
 
Aconitine 
Aconitine is a poisonous alkaloid derived from aconite. 
 
Acoustic 
The term acoustic refers to hearing.  
 
Acoustics 
see "acoustic" 
 
Acre 
An acre is a measurement of land area being 4840 square yards.  
 
Acridine 
Acridine is an organic compound with the formulae c13h9n used in dyes and 
drugs.  
 
Acriflavine 
Acriflavine is an antiseptic powder.  
 
Acromegaly 
Acromegaly is a disease due to over activity of the pituitary gland 
results in excessive bone growth, especially the skull. 
 
Acronym 
An acronym is a word formed from the initials of other words. 
 
Acrophobia 
Acrophobia is the fear of high places.  
 
Acropolis 
The acropolis was the citadel of ancient Greek cities.  
 
Acrylic 
Acrylic is a synthetic fibre derived from acrylic acid. 
 
Actinide 
An actinide is an element with an atomic number between 89 and 103. 
 
Actinium 
Actinium is a radioactive element.  
 
Actinometer 
An actinometer is an instrument for measuring heat radiation. 
 
Adaptive Equalization 
Adaptive Equalization is a telecommunications term refering to the 
equalization of received digital signals capable of adjustment during 
actual transmission. 
 
Adhesive 
An adhesive is a sticky substance.  
 
Adipocere 
Adipocere is a substance in dead bodies formed by decomposition of fatty 
acids when exposed to moisture.  
 
Adit 
An adit is the horizontal entrance to a mine. 
 
Admiralty 
The admiralty was the board of state charged with the provision, 
organisation and control of the royal navy. It was founded by Henry VIII 
and amalgamated in 1964 into the ministry of defence. 
 
Adobe 
An adobe is a Mexican house made of clay bricks.  
 
Adult 
An adult is a fully grown being.  
 
Adytum 
An adytum is the inner most part of a temple. 
 
Adze 
An adze is a carpenter's tool for cutting away the surface of wood. 
 
Aeon 
An aeon is an immeasurable period.  
 
Aerial 
An aerial is a receiving or radiating device used in radio 
communications.  
 
Aerodrome 
An aerodrome is a place where aircraft are based. 
 
Afrikaans 
Afrikaans is a language used in the Republic of South Africa. 
 
Agar 
Agar is a laxative substance obtained from seaweed. 
 
Agenda 
An agenda is a list of tasks. 
 
Aggry Beads 
Aggry Beads are glass beads prized by West African natives as ornaments 
and having magical and medicinal powers.  
 
Agoraphobia 
Agoraphobia is the fear of open spaces. 
 
Air 
The air is a mixture of gasses enveloping the earth.  
 
Aircraft 
An aircraft is a flying machine, a vessel which flies through the air 
rather than floats on water or travels along a road or rail.  
 
Aisle 
An aisle is a passage between rows of seats.  
 
Albugo 
Albugo is an affection of the eye, consisting of a white opacity in the 
cornea. 
 
Alchemy 
Alchemy was the medieval forerunner to chemistry. 
 
Alcohol 
Alcohol is a volatile liquid derived from hydrocarbons. 
 
Alcoholic 
see "alcohol" 
 
Aldehyde 
Aldehyde is a chemistry term applied to the compounds of alcohol 
intermediate between the alcohols and the acids. 
 
Ale 
Ale is an alcoholic drink made from malt and hops.  
 
Aleurometer 
An aleurometer is a device used in bread making for measuring the quality 
of wheaten flour. 
 
Algebra 
Algebra is a division of mathematics dealing with relations.  
 
Algerbraic 
see "algebra" 
 
Algol 
Algol is an algerbraic computer language. 
 
Algorithm 
An algorithm is a set of rules. 
 
Alkali 
An alkali is a chemical substance.  
 
Alkaloid 
The alkaloids are nitrogenous organic substances. 
 
Alkane 
The alkanes are the paraffin series of hydrocarbons.  
 
Alkanes 
see "alkane" 
 
Alkene 
An alkene is a member of the ethylene series of hydrocarbons. 
 
Alkyl 
Alkyl refers to a substance which is derived from or related to the 
paraffin series of hydrocarbons.  
 
Allergy 
An allergy is a hypersensitivity of body tissue to a substance. 
 
Alley 
An alley is a narrow street.  
 
Allies 
The Allies were various countries that fought the Axis forces in the 
Second World War.  
 
Alloy 
An alloy is a mixture of a metal and other metals or non-metals.  
 
Alluvium 
Alluvium is river transported deposits of mud, sand and gravel which 
accumulate to form distinctive features such as levees, flood plains and 
deltas. 
 
Alpha 
Alpha is the first letter of the Greek alphabet.  
 
Alphabet 
An alphabet is an ordered series of letters used in language. 
 
Altar 
An altar is a block used for making offerings to a deity. 
 
Althing 
The althing is the parliament of Iceland, it was created in 930 and is 
the oldest parliamentary assembly in the world.  
 
Altimeter 
An altimeter is a device measuring altitude.  
 
Altitude 
Altitude is height above mean sea level.  
 
Aluminium 
Aluminium is a light-weight silvery metal element.  
 
Ambaree 
Ambaree is a fibre similar to jute and largely used in India. It is 
obtained from Hibiscus cannabinus.  
 
Amber 
Amber is fossilised resin.  
 
Ambergris 
Ambergris is a substance derived from the intestine of the sperm whale 
and used in perfume. 
 
Ambidextrous 
Ambidextrous is having the facility to use the left hand as effectively 
as the right. 
 
Amenorrhoea 
Amenorrhoea is a medical condition being the absence or suspension of 
mensturation. 
 
Amice 
An amice is a white linen vestment worn by Roman Catholic and many 
Anglican priests when officiating at Mass or Holy Eucharist. 
 
Amino acid 
Amino acids are fundamental constituents of all proteins. 
 
Amino acids 
see "amino_acid" 
 
Ammeter 
An ammeter is a device for measuring electrical current.  
 
Ammonia 
Ammonia is a colourless gas. Formulae nh3.  
 
Ammonium 
Ammonium is the basic radical of ammonium salts. It is comprised of one 
atom of nitrogen and four atoms of hydrogen.  
 
Amp 
see "ampere" 
 
Ampere 
The ampere is the fundamental unit of measurement of electrical current.  
 
Amphetamine 
Amphetamine is a drug that induces sleeplessness. 
 
Amphitheatre 
An amphitheatre is a circular or ovular arena surrounded by tiers of 
seats. 
 
Amplitude 
Amplitude refers to magnitude or size. It is the voltage or power of an 
electronic signal.  
 
Amplitude Modulation 
Amplitude Modulation is modifying a "carrier" signal by varying its 
instantaneous power to represent the information it carries. Most 
commonly called "AM". 
 
Anabaptist 
The Anabaptists were a 16th century Christian sect, so called because 
they rejected infant baptism in reference of adult baptism. They were a 
fanatical sect led by Nicholas Storck who intended reorganisation of 
German society based upon civil and political equality.  
 
Anabaptists 
see "Anabaptist" 
 
Anaemia 
Anaemia is the medical condition of lacking red blood cells.  
 
Analgesic 
An analgesic is a pain reliever.  
 
Anchor 
An anchor is a heavy implement used for securing boats at sea.  
 
Andante 
Andante is a musical term denoting a movement somewhat slow, graceful, 
distinct and soothing. 
 
Anemometer 
An anemometer is a device for measuring wind speed. 
 
Angiosperm 
An angiosperm is a flowering plant in which the seeds are enclosed within 
an ovary which ripens into a fruit. 
 
Angst 
Angst is an emotional state of anxiety without a specific cause.  
 
Aniline 
Aniline (Phenylamine) is an oily liquid made by the reduction of nitro-
benzene and used in the manufacture of chemicals, dyes and drugs.  
 
Anker 
The anker was a measurement used in Britain and Germany for beer, spirits 
and the like. It was equivalent to 8.5 gallons. 
 
ANSI 
ANSI is the American National Standards Institute. The official 
repository of standards for the USA.  
 
Anthrax 
Anthrax is a disease of sheep and cattle transmittable to humans. 
 
Anthropology 
Anthropology is the study of humans as animals. 
 
Antibiotic 
An antibiotic is a substance that inhibits the growth of micro organisms. 
 
Antidote 
An antidote is a drug used to counteract poison.  
 
Antiseptic 
An antiseptic is a substance which counteracts blood or tissue poisoning 
caused by bacteria (sepsis). 
 
Antonine Wall 
The Antonine Wall was a Roman line of fortification built around 142-200 
AD as the Roman Empire's North West frontier between the Clyde and Forth 
in Scotland.  
 
Anvil 
An anvil is a block used by metal smiths. 
 
Anxiolytic 
An anxiolytic is a drug used to reduce anxiety. 
 
Apartheid 
Apartheid is the plicy of racial segregation of people. It was first 
established in South Africa in 1948 restricting the rights of nonwhites 
and establishing blacks only homelands.  
 
Aperture 
In photography, an aperture is an opening through which light passes 
through the lens to strike the film. 
 
Aphasia 
Aphasia is difficulty in reading, writing and speaking due to brain 
damage. 
 
Aphelion 
The aphelion is the point at which an object travelling around the sun in 
an elliptical orbit is at its furthest from the sun.  
 
Apogee 
Apogee is an astronomical term refering to the position in the orbit of 
the Moon which is farthest from the Earth. Opposite to Perigee. 
 
Apollo Asteroid 
The Apollo Asteroids are a group of small asteroids whose orbits cross 
that of the earth. They were first discovered in 1932 and then lost until 
1973.  
 
Apollo Project 
The Apollo Project was the US space project to land a person on the moon. 
It was achieved by Apollo 11 in July 1969.  
 
Applique 
Applique is a type of embroidery used to create pictures or patterns by 
applying pieces of material to a background fabric. 
 
Aquatint 
Aquatint is a method of print-making which was popular in the 18th 
century. 
 
Aqueduct 
An aqueduct is a channel in which water flows by gravity. 
 
Archeozoic 
The archeozoic period was the first geological period. It was 
characterized by an absence of animal life and extensive volcanic 
activity. 
 
Arcnet 
Arcnet is a LAN architecture developed by Datapoint Corporation featuring 
low cost for connection of groups of (Async) terminals to a (mini) 
computer within a premises.  
 
Argon 
Argon is an inert gaseous element found in the air. 
 
Aries 
Aries is one of the signs of the zodiac. Represented by the ram.  
 
Armature 
An armature is a part of an electrical motor or dynamo. 
 
Armour 
Armour is a protective covering.  
 
Arms 
Arms is a military term referring to weapons. 
 
Army 
An army is an organised fighting force. 
 
Arroba 
Arroba was a Spanish unit of weight equal to about 25 lbs. It was also 
used in South and Central America, where it was equivalent to about 32 
lbs.  
 
Arsenal 
An arsenal is a place for storing weapons.  
 
Arshin 
Arshin is a Russian unit of measurement equivalent to 28 inches.  
 
Ascii 
Ascii is the American Standard Code for Information Interchange. 
The most common code used for asynchronous data transmission by 
minicomputers and personal computers. Derived from the TWX code of the 
Bell Model 28 teleprinter, expanded to use all possible character 
combinations. 
ASCII consists of 7 information bits with an 8th parity bit for error 
checking; numerous variations exist, for example use of the 8th bit in 
personal computers to extend the code with a number of graphics, special 
language characters and diacritical marks. Many common carrier data 
services cannot transmit the 8th bit needed to use that common PC 
extension of ASCII's alphabet.  
 
Ascorbic acid 
see "Vitamin_c" 
 
Ash wednesday 
Ash wednesday is the first day of lent, the seventh wednesday before 
easter.  
 
Asphalt 
Asphalt is a material used for road coverings.  
 
Aspirin 
Aspirin is an analgesic.  
 
Assay 
Assay is the testing of an alloy or an ore to determine the proportion of 
a given metal. An assay officer is someone who certifies the fineness of 
gold, silver and platinum. 
 
Astern 
Astern is a nautical term meaning behind the ship.  
 
Asteroid 
An asteroid is a minor planetary body.  
 
Asthma 
Asthma is a disease characterized by breathing difficulties.  
 
Astrology 
Astrology is the science of the relationship between events and the 
stars.  
 
Astronomy 
Astronomy is the study of celestial bodies. 
 
Asynchronous 
Asynchronous refers to occurring without central control or in an 
unpredictable time interval between successive elements;  the typical 
mode of telegraphy, minicomputers and personal computers; requires s 
transmission of "start" and "stop" bits to provide decoding 
synchronization at the receiver. 
 
Athletics 
Athletics is the sport of physical games. 
 
Atmosphere 
The atmosphere is the gaseous envelope surrounding a planet, such as that 
which surrounds the earth which is comprised of nitrogen, oxygen, argon 
carbon dioxide, helium, water vapour and other gases. 
 
Atom 
An atom is a body too small to be divided into individual parts.  
 
Atoms 
see "atom" 
 
Atrium 
The atrium was the entrance hall to a Roman house.  
 
Atropine 
Atropine is the poisonous alkaloid found in deadly nightshade.  
 
Attenuation 
Attenuation is a term denoting a decrease in power between that 
transmitted and that received due to loss through equipment, lines, or 
other transmission devices.  Usually expressed as a ratio in dB 
(decibels). - Synonym: Loss; Antonym: Gain 
 
Avoirdupois 
The avoirdupois scale is a measurement of weight. 
 
Axe 
An axe is a metal tool for chopping and cleaving. 
 
Babel 
The tower of Babel was built by the people of Babylon in an attempt to 
reach heaven.  
 
Baccarat 
Baccarat is a gambling card game. 
 
Backgammon 
Backgammon is an old board game also called tric trac, tavla or tables. 
 
Badmington 
Badmington is a game played on a court divided in half by a 30 inch deep 
net five feet above the ground.  
 
Bagpipe 
The bagpipe is a Scottish musical instrument. 
 
Bakelite 
Bakelite is a strong synthetic material resistant to heat and chemicals.  
 
Balalaika 
A balalaika is a stringed Russian musical instrument. 
 
Baldric 
A baldric is a belt used to support a sword or bugle. 
 
Ballad 
A ballad is a narrative song. 
 
Ballistics 
Ballistics is the theory of missile projection. 
 
Balloon 
A balloon is a bag filled with gas. 
 
Ballot 
A ballot is a method of secret voting.  
 
Banjo 
A banjo is a stringed musical instrument. 
 
Barge 
A barge is a type of long narrow flat bottomed boat.  
 
Barometer 
A barometer is a device for measuring air pressure. 
 
Baron 
Baron is an English peerage title.  
 
Barque 
A barque is a type of masted sailing ship.  
 
Barquentine 
A barquentine is a 3 mast sailing ship. 
 
Barrel 
A barrel is a dry and liquid measurement that varies with substance.  
 
Basalt 
Basalt is the name given to lava. It is high in ferrous and magnesian 
silicates.  
 
Baseball 
Baseball is the national game of USA. 
 
Basket 
A basket is a woven container.  
 
Bassoon 
A bassoon is a woodwind musical instrument. 
 
Baud 
Baud is a unit of computer etc signaling speed. The speed in Baud is the 
number of discrete conditions or signal elements per second.  If each 
signal event represents only one bit condition, then Baud is the same as 
bits per second. Baud does not equal bits per second. 
 
Bauhaus 
Bauhaus is a German institution for training architects, artists and 
industrial designers founded in 1919 at Weimer.  
 
BBS 
A BBS (Bulletin Board System) is a communicating computer equipped so as 
to provide informational messages, file storage and transfer and a degree 
of message exchange to dial-up data terminal or personal computer users. 
 
BCD 
BCD (Binary Coded Decimal) is a binary-coded notation in which each 
decimal digit of a number is expressed in binary form; Example: 23 
decimal is 10111 in binary, and 0010 0011 in BCD.  
 
Beaufort scale 
The beaufort scale measures wind speed at sea.  
 
Beer 
Beer is a drink of fermented hops, malt and barley. 
 
Bellows 
Bellows are apparatus for creating a draught. 
 
Belt 
A belt is a flat strip of material worn around the waist. 
 
Benedictine 
Benedictine is a green liqueur. 
 
Benzine 
Benzine is a distillate of petroleum used in dry cleaning.  
 
Beryllium 
Beryllium is an alkaline metal element. 
 
Bessemer converter 
The bessemer converter is a process for making cheap steel. Basicaly, 
impurities are removed from the pig iron by blasting air through the 
molten metal and adding lime to remove phosphorus from the metal. The 
process takes about twenty minutes.  
 
Bezique 
Bezique is a card game using some of two packs of cards.  
 
Bhang 
Bhang is an Indian drink prepared from the leave and shoots of the hemp 
(cannabis) plant. 
 
Bicycle 
A bicycle is a two wheeled vehicle. 
 
Bikini 
The Bikini is a two-piece item of women's swimwear. It was invented in 
1946 by a French designer and was called the "bikini" after the atom bomb 
test at bikini atol, the premise being that the bikini was as small as an 
atom, and the results were explosive! When first revealed, no 
professional model could be found to model such a revealing item of 
clothing, and so a cabaret dancer was hired to model the first bikini. 
 
Billiards 
Billiards is a game played with two white balls and one red ball and a 
cue on a slate bed table. One of the white balls has two black spots on 
it, this ball is called the spot-ball and is used to start the game. 
 
Bise 
The bise is a dry north wind prevalent in Switzerland and southern 
France.  
 
Bitter 
Bitter is a taste sensation caused by stimulation of the gustatory nerve. 
 
Bitters 
Bitters is an alcoholic beverage of sugar herbs and alcohol.  
 
Bitumen 
Bitumen is a natural inflammable pitchy hydrocarbon.  
 
Black Feet 
The Black Feet are a north American Indian tribe. 
 
Blackhead 
A blackhead is dirt blocking a pore that often causes acne. 
 
Blanket 
A blanket is an extensive covering. Often a warm bed covering.  
 
Bloom 
A bloom is a lump of puddled iron, which leaves the furnace in a rough 
state, to be subsequently rolled into bars or whatever.  
 
Bloomer Costume 
The Bloomer costume was a style of dress adopted around 1849 by Mrs 
Bloomer of New York. It consisted of a jacket with close sleeves, a skirt 
reaching a little below the knee, and a pair of Turkish pantaloons 
secured by bands around the ankles.  
 
Blue peter 
The blue peter is a flag flown by ships as they are about to sail.  
 
Bluefish 
The bluefish is a fish found off the east coast of north America. 
 
Boat 
A boat is transport for conveyance across water.  
 
Bog 
Bog is the name given to soft spongy land.  
 
Bohea 
Bohea is an inferior kind of black tea. 
 
Bolero 
The bolero is a spanish dance of the ballet class for couples or a single 
female dancer.  
 
Bolt-ropes 
Bolt-ropes were ropes used to strengthen the sails of a ship. 
 
Bombardier 
A bombardier an artillery soldier, originally a bombardier was an 
artillery soldier whose duties were connected with mortars and howitzers, 
but now is the lowest non-commissioned officer of artillery.  
 
Bootikin 
A bootikin was a wood and iron boot used in torture to extract 
confessions from the victim. Wooden wedges were hammered between the leg 
and the boot with a mallet so as to crush the victims bone. 
 
Bootstrap Loader 
A Bootstrap Loader is a computer input routine in which preset operations 
are placed into a computer that enable it to get into operation whenever 
a reset condition occurs; in electronic PBXs this may be called Automatic 
Program Loading or a similar term; in personal computers it is the 
sequence that searches predetermined disks for a Command Interpreter 
program, then a Configure System file; finally an Autoexecution Batch 
file.  
 
Boric acid 
Boric acid is an acid of borax found naturally. 
 
Boron 
Boron is an element found in borax. 
 
Bowline 
The bowline is a non-slip knot. 
 
Bran 
Bran is the outer covering of wheat grains. 
 
Brandy 
Brandy is an alcoholic beverage of distiled wine. 
 
Brass 
Brass is an alloy of copper and zinc. 
 
Brig 
A brig is a two masted sailing ship.  
 
Brigantine 
A brigantine is a 2 mast sailing ship.  
 
Bromine 
Bromine is a non-metallic element.  
 
Bronchitis 
Bronchitis is a chronic inflammation of the bronchial mucous membrane.  
 
Bronze 
Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. 
 
Buckram 
Buckram was a coarse textile fabric stiffened with glue and used in 
garments to give them and to keep them in the form intended.  
 
Buckskin 
Buckskin is a soft form of leather. 
 
Bude Light 
The bude light was a very bright gas lamp invented by Mr Gurney who lived 
in Bude, Cornwall. The bude lamp fed a stream of oxygen into the flame of 
an argand-lamp or gas-burner. 
 
Buff 
Buff is the stout velvety dull-yellow leather of buffalo or ox hide.  
 
Buff Leather 
Buff leather is a type of leather made from the skin of buffalo and other 
oxen. It is dressed with oil and used for making bandoliers, belts, 
pouches and gloves amongst other items. 
 
Bugle 
A bugle is a brass musical instrument.  
 
Bulimia 
Bulimia is a disorder in which the patient has a morbidly voracious 
appetite. It is certainly not a new disorder, for it was known of in 
1906.  
 
Bulkhead 
A bulkhead is an upright partition dividing watertight compartments of a 
ship.  
 
Bullion 
Bullion is gold or silver in bars, plates or other masses which has not 
been minted 
 
Bum-boat 
A bum-boat is a small boat used to sell produce to ships lying at a 
distance from the shore 
 
Bunion 
A bunion is an inflamed swelling on the foot, especially at the joint of 
the great toe. 
 
Burl 
A burl is a knot. The term is used in veneering to refer to an overgrown 
knot in the wood.  
 
Busby 
A busby is a headdress worn by British army hussars.  
 
Bushel 
The bushel is a unit of capacity measurement equivalen to 4 pecks, 8 
gallons or 3.637 dekalitres. 
 
Bushels 
see "Bushel" 
 
Butane 
Butane is an alkane inflammable gas by product of petroleum.  
 
Butte 
A butte is an isolated abrupt flat-topped hill found in the west USA. 
 
Buttress 
A buttress in architecture is a pier built against the exterior of a 
wall.  
 
Cabala 
see "Qabbala" 
 
Caballa 
see "Qabbala" 
 
Cabbala 
see "Qabbala" 
 
Caber 
A caber is a roughly trimmed young pine-trunk used in Scottish highland 
games (tossing the caber).  
 
cable 
In nautical terms, a cable is 183 metres. 
 
cadmium 
Cadmium is a metal element. 
 
Calciferol 
see "Vitamin_D" 
 
Calcium 
Calcium is a metal element. It is an alkaline metal.  
 
Calends 
Calends was the first day of the Roman calendar month.  
 
Calf 
A calf is a young bovine animal, especially a young cow.  
 
Calipers 
Calipers are an instrument for measuring dimensions of circular solids. 
 
Calorie 
Calorie is the metric unit of measurement of heat.  
 
Cam miles 
Cam miles is a perennial dwarf herb of the order compositae.  
 
Cambrian 
The Cambrian period was the third geological period, 450,000,000 years 
ago. 
 
Camelot 
Camelot was the castle of Arthur. 
 
Cameo 
A cameo is a small relief carving.  
 
Camouflage 
Camouflage is colours or structures which allow an animal to blend in 
with its surroundings.  
 
Canal 
A canal is an artificial open water channel.  
 
Cancer 
Cancer is a disease of malignant tumours, what causes it is unknown, 
however experiments in the 1950s revealed a connection between concious 
belief and cancer, that is patients who had cancerous tumours removed and 
believed themselves to be free of the cancer were less likely to suffer 
re-emergence of the cancer than patients who believed the cancer would 
re-occur. 
 
Candelabrum 
A candelabrum is a large candlestick. 
 
Candle 
A candle is a wax cylinder enclosing a wick. It is burnt to provide 
light.  
 
Capricorn 
Capricorn is a sign of the zodiac symbolised by a goat. 
 
Capstan 
A capstan is a revolving barrel with a vertical axis powered by people. 
It is used for winding cable. On sailing ships the capstan is used to 
raise and lower the anchor. 
 
Carat 
Carat is the unit of measurement of gold purity.  
 
Carbide 
see "carbides" 
 
Carbides 
A carbide is a compound of carbon and another element.  
 
Carbohydrate 
A carbohydrate is a complex chemical compound. Consisting of carbon, 
oxygen and hydrogen. In foods it forms sugars and starch.  
 
Carbolic acid 
Carbolic acid is a strong poison distiled from coal tar.  
 
Carbon 
Carbon is a non-metallic element. Contained in all life forms.  
 
Carbonate 
A carbonate is a salt formed by the union of carbon dioxide with a base 
element.  
 
Carboniferous 
The Carboniferous was the seventh geological period, 250,000,000 years 
ago. This era marked the formation of the coal beds. 
 
Carborundum 
Carborundum is silicon carbide and is extremely hard. 
 
Carboy 
A carboy is a large globular wicker-covered glass bottle used for holding 
acid or other corrosive liquids.  
 
Carburettor 
A carburettor is a device for charging air with a hydrocarbon.  
 
Caries 
Caries is a disease resulting from inflammation of bony tissue. 
 
Carmine 
Carmine is a red colouring derived from the cochineal insect. 
 
carotene 
see "vitamin_a" 
 
Carpet 
Carpet is a thick fabric, often made of wool, used for covering a floor. 
It is made by knotting short lengths of yarn to to the warp threads 
during weaving.  
 
Carron oil 
Carron oil is a mixture of linseed oil and lime water which was formerly 
used for treating burns. It was first used at the Carron ironworks near 
Falkirk. 
 
Cart 
A cart is a strong two or four wheeled vehicle used in farming and for 
carrying heavy goods.  
 
Cartel 
A cartel is a written agreement for the exchange or ransom of prisoners.  
 
Carton 
A carton is a light box or case for holding goods.  
 
Cartouche 
In architecture, a cartouche is a scroll ornament.  
 
Cartridge-paper 
Cartridge-paper is a thick paper. It is so named because it was 
originally used to make soldiers' cartridges. 
 
Caruncle 
A caruncle is a small hard outgrowth formed on the seeds of certain 
plants, such as the castor oil plant. 
 
Caryopsis 
Caryopsis is a botanical term for a one-seeded indehiscent fruit with 
pericarp fused to the seed-coat, as in wheat and barley.  
 
Casareep 
Casareep is the concentrated juice of the roots of the cassava flavoured 
with aromatics and boiled to remove the toxins. It is then used as a 
relish in soups and other dishes. It is the basis of the Jamaican dish 
"pepper-pot". Casareep is also a powerful antiseptic and was used for 
preserving meat in tropical countries. 
 
Cascara 
Cascara is an extract of the bark of the Californian buckthorn used as a 
laxative or cathartic. 
 
Case-hardening 
Case-hardening is a process whereby iron objects have their outside layer 
converted to steel. The object is put in a box containig carbon and is 
heated until red hot. Then it is immeresed in cold water where upon a 
layer of steel forms on the object.  
 
Casein 
Casein is a protein found in milk.  
 
Cassock 
A cassock is a long close fitting tunic, buttoning up to the neck and 
reaching down to the feet, worn by the clergy.  
 
Castanet 
Castanets are small concave shells of ivory or hard wood used by the 
Spaniards and Moors to make a rattling sound to accompany dancing. A pair 
of castanets are held in the palm of the hand and struck with the middle 
finger. 
 
Caste 
Caste is an Indian hereditary class system with members socially equal, 
united in religion and usually following the same trade. A member of one 
caste has no social intercourse with a member of any other caste except 
their own. 
 
Castor 
Castor is a reddish-brown bitter substance obtained from the anal glands 
of the beaver and used in perfume and medicine.  
 
Castor oil 
Castor oil is a pale yellow nauseous acrid oil obtained from the seeds of 
the Castor oil plant and used as a purgative and lubricant. 
 
Catacomb 
Catacombs are subterranean cemetries. 
 
Catalase 
In chemistry, a catalase is any of various enzymes capable of decomposing 
hydrogen peroxide.  
 
Catalepsy 
Catalepsy is a disease characterized by seizures or trances which last 
for hours or days with a suspension of sensation and conciousness. 
 
Catalyst 
A catalyst is a substance which facilitates a reaction, without being 
consumed by the reaction itself. It is a term generally used in 
chemistry, although it is equally applicable in applied Psychology, such 
as in the role of an antagonist or provacteur. 
 
Catarrh 
Catarrh is the inflammation of a mucous membrane, particularly that of 
the nose, throat or bronchial tubes, causing an increased flow of mucus. 
 
Catboat 
A catboat is a sailing boat with a single mast set well forward and 
rigged with one sail. 
 
Catcher 
A catcher is a fielder who stands behind the batter in baseball.  
 
Catgut 
Catgut is the dried and twisted intestines of sheep or horses used for 
making the strings of musical instruments and tennis rackets and for 
sutures in surgery. 
 
Cathetometer 
A cathetometer is a device for measuring small differences in height. 
 
Cathode 
A cathode is a negative electrical pole or terminal.  
 
Caudle 
Caudle is a warm, thin spiced gruel made with wine and sugar which was 
given to invalids and women after childbirth.  
 
Caul 
A caul is a woman's close-fitting cap or hair net.  
 
Cauldron 
A cauldron is a large boiling vessel, usually of a deep basin shape with 
a hoop handle and a removable lid. 
 
Causeway 
A causeway is a raised road across a low or wet piece of land.  
 
Cautery 
A cautery is a heated metal instrument used for burning or searing 
organic tissue.  
 
Cavalcade 
A cavalcade is a procession of riders on horse-back.  
 
Cave 
A cave is a deep hollow place under ground. 
 
Cavendish 
Cavendish is softened tobacco which has been sweetened with molasses and 
then pressed into cakes. 
 
CBI 
The CBI is the British organisation of employers. 
 
CCIR 
The CCIR (Comite Consultatif Internationale des Radio), is a major 
constituent of the International Telecommunications Union, issuing both 
Radio Regulations and Recommendations for all uses of radio transmission.  
 
CCITT 
The CCITT (Comite Consultatif Internationale des Telephones et 
Telegraphes), is a major constituent of the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) that sets standards for the operation of 
telecommunications services across international boundaries. Many CCITT 
standards are adopted for use domestically.  
 
Ceilidh 
A ceilidh is a Gaelic festival of singing and dancing held in Scotland 
and Ireland. 
 
Celluloid 
Celluloid is a hard, unstable synthetic substance once used for films.  
 
Cellulose 
Cellulose is the cellular tissue of plants. Used as cotton and paper. 
 
Cement 
Cement is a mixture of chalk and clay used for building.  
 
Cental 
The cental was a weight of 100 pounds legal in Britain since 1879.  
 
Cerium 
Cerium is a rare metal element. 
 
Chain 
The chain is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 22 yards or 20.168 metres. 
A chain is comprised of 100 links, each 7.92 inches long. 
 
Chains 
see "chain" 
 
Chalder 
Chalder was a Scottish dry measure containing 16 bolls, equivalent to 12 
imperial quarters. 
 
Chaldron 
The chaldron is an old English unit of capacity measurement equivalent to 
36 bushels. 
 
Chalice 
A chalice is a ceremonial cup.  
 
Charcoal 
Charcoal is an amorphous form of carbon formed by charring wood.  
 
Chariot 
A chariot was a two wheeled vehicle used in ancient warfare.  
 
Chauvinism 
Chauvanism is fanatical devotion to a cause, especially patrotism. The 
term comes from Nicholas Chauvin who was a soldier so enthusiastically 
devoted to Napoleon that his comrades ridiculed him.  
 
Cheese 
Cheese is a food made by condensing milk fat and casein.  
 
Chemistry 
Chemistry is the science of the composition of substances.  
 
Cheng 
The cheng is a chinese musical instrument. It is comprised of a series of 
tubes with free reeds. Its introduction into Europe led to the 
development of the accordion and harmonium.  
 
Chenille 
Chenille is an ornamental fabric made by weaving or twisting together 
warp-like threads with a weft the loose ends of which protrude all round 
in the form of a pile. 
 
Chess 
Chess is a game of skill played on a chequered board. 
 
Chicken pox 
Chicken pox is an infectious disease of children and adults.  
 
Chicle 
Chicle is a gum-like substance obtained from the bully tree and used for 
making chewing gum.  
 
Chilli 
Chilli is a spice, being either the pod or powder of capsicum.  
 
Chintz 
Originally, chintz was a painted or stained calico imported from India. 
 
Chlorate 
A chlorate is a salt formed by the reaction of chloric acid and metal.  
 
Chlorates 
see "chlorate" 
 
Chloric acid 
Chloric acid is a oxyacid of chlorine. It is a powerful oxidising agent.  
 
Chlorine 
Chlorine is a gaseous element.  
 
Chloroform 
Chloroform (trichloRomethane) once used as an anaesthetic.  
 
Chlorophyll 
Chlorophyll is the green colouring matter of plant leaves.  
 
Cholera 
Cholera is an infectious disease caused by a micro organism.  
 
Cholesterol 
Cholesterol is a steroid alcohol present in animal cells and body fluids. 
 
Chromium 
Chromium is a metal element.  
 
Cider 
Cider is an alcoholic beverage made from fermented apple juice. 
 
Citric acid 
Citric acid is found in citrus fruits. It has the formulae c6h807.  
 
Clarinet 
A clarinet is a woodwind musical instrument.  
 
Clarion 
A clarion is a musical instrument of the trumpet family.  
 
Clipper 
A clipper is a sharp bowed fast sailing vessel. 
 
Cloak 
A cloak is a loose fitting, usually sleeveless outer garment. 
 
Clog 
A clog is a wooden soled, leather uppered boot. 
 
Cloisonne 
Cloisonne is a form of decorative enamel. 
 
Cloud 
A cloud is a mist formed above the ground by floating water particles.  
 
Clove hitch 
The clove hitch is a knot.  
 
Coal 
Coal is a solid combustible material of vegetable origin occurring in a 
fossilised state. 
 
Coal-tar 
Coal-tar is a thick black viscous liquid produced by the destructive 
distillation of coal. Coal-tar yields benzene, creosote, paraffin, 
aniline and dyes. 
 
Coaster 
A coaster is a ship which carries cargo around a country's coast. 
 
Coaxial Cable 
A coaxial cable is a cable in which one conductor surrounds the other.  
The electromagnetic wave travels between the grounded outer shield and 
the central conductor. Coaxials can carry much wider bandwidth and higher 
frequencies than twisted wire pair, while suffering less interference 
problems due to the grounded outer conductor. Where the maximum frequency 
capable on twisted pair wiring is about 16 megahertz and then only for 
short distances, coaxial cable readily carries several hundred megahertz 
for 300 metres.  
 
Cobalt 
Cobalt is a metal element.  
 
Cocaine 
Cocaine is an alkaloid derived from the leaves of the coca plant. 
 
Codeine 
Codeine is an alkaloid derived from opium used as a pain killer.  
 
Coke 
Coke is charred coal. 
 
Colchicine 
Colchicine is an alkaloid derived from meadow saffron.  
 
Colic 
Colic is severe abdominal griping pains.  
 
Colitis 
Colitis is inflammation of the colon. 
 
Collier 
A collier is a medium-sized bulk carrier ship normally operated on 
coastal and short-sea routes.  
 
Coma 
A coma is a state of deep unconsciousness.  
 
Comet 
A comet is a small body orbiting the sun on an elliptical path with a 
long tail of dust and ice.  
 
Compass 
A compass is an instrument for finding direction. 
 
Compiler 
A compiler is a computer program that translates high level language code 
into machine language code. It was invented by grace murray hopper in 
1951. 
 
Compound 
A compound is a substance made of two or more elements. 
 
Computer 
A computer is a programmable electronic device. 
 
Concertina 
A concertina is a wind musical instrument comprised of bellows and two 
keyboards. 
 
Concrete 
Concrete is a building material of cement, sand, stone and water. 
 
Conia 
Conia is the volatile alkaloid poison found in hemlock. 
 
CONSIGHT 
CONSIGHT is an industrial machine vision object-recognition system which 
uses lighting effects to produce silhouette-like images. 
 
Constant 
In mathematics a constant is a fixed value. 
 
Constantan 
Constantan is an alloy of copper and nickel.  
 
Constellation 
A constellation, in astronomy, is a divisional area of the sky. 
 
Constipation 
Constipation is irregular and insufficient evacuation of the bowels.  
 
Constituency 
A constituency is a body of electors. 
 
Contralto 
In music, contralto is the highest voice of a male adult, or the lowest 
of a woman or boy. It is also known as Alto or counter-tenor. 
 
Corbillon cup 
The corbillon cup is a table tennis tournament. 
 
Cordovan 
Cordovan is a fine leather which took its name from the Spanish city of 
Cordova where it was manufactured in large quantities.  
 
Corduroy 
Corduroy is a thick cotton material corded, or ribbed on one surface. 
 
Corned Beef 
Beef meat which has been "corned", that is soaked in water with salt and 
a little potassium nitrate, for about 10 days. 
 
Cosmology 
Cosmology is the study of the structure of the universe.  
 
Crack 
Crack is the crystalline form of cocaine. 
 
CRC 
CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check) is a powerful error checking method for 
data and digital communications. The transmitting terminal computes  a 
numeric value representative of the number of marking bits in the 
associated block of data and sends that value to the receiver, where the 
number is recomputed to compare against the block as received.  Depending 
on the number of bits in the CRC numeric value the error trapping 
efficiency ranges from about 97 % at CRC-6 to 99.997% at CRC-32.  Values 
of CRC-8 and CRC-16 are adequate for most data message block sizes, while 
CRC-32 is needed mainly for very long blocks of tens of thousands of 
characters. 
 
Cretaceous 
The Cretaceous was the eleventh geological period, 95,000,000 years ago. 
The first marsupials evolved.  
 
Croup 
Croup is the inflammation of the larynx.  
 
Crwth 
The crwth was a Welsh form of violin with 6 strings. 4 of the strings 
were played with a bow, the other 2 being plucked by the fingers. 
 
Cupro nickel 
Cupro nickel is an alloy of copper and nickel 
 
Curare 
Curare is a poison derived from the bark of a south American tree.  
 
Curtis cup 
The curtis cup is an international golf tournament. 
 
CWT 
see "Hundredweight" 
 
Cyanide 
Cyanide is a salt of hydrocyanic acid. Notably potassium cyanide. 
 
Cyclone 
A cyclone is an area of low atmospheric pressure. 
 
Cystitis 
Cystitis is an inflammation of the bladder. 
 
Cytochrome 
Cytochrome is a type of protein.  
 
Dada 
The dada is an artistic and literary movement founded in 1915 in Zurich.  
 
Dak 
Dak was the east indian postal service. Properly a dak was a relay of men 
carrying letters, despatches and the like.  
 
Dam 
A dam is a structure constructed to hold back water and provide 
controlled flow for irrigation, storage and generation of electricity.  
 
Damaskeening 
Damaskeening is the process of ornamenting iron and steel with designs 
produced by inlaying or incrusting with another metal such as gold or 
silver, by etching and the like. 
 
Dance 
Dance is a rhythmic movement of the body usually performed to music.  
 
Data 
Data is information, especially that stored in a computer.  
 
Daturine 
Daturine is the poisonous alkaloid found in the thorn-apple.  
 
Davis cup 
The Davis cup is a tennis tournament. 
 
Day 
A day is the time taken for the earth to rotate once on its axis. 
 
dBM 
dBM is an identifier meaning "decibels referred to one milliwatt," the 
common reference point for power levels in telecommunications circuits.  
 
Ddt 
Ddt is an insecticide discovered in 1939 by Paul Muller.  
 
Decathlon 
The decathlon is a 2 day olympic athletic event.  
 
Decibel 
The decibel is the unit of measurement of sound intensity. 
In electronics, the decibel is a unit of measurement representing the 
logarithmic a ratio of two voltages, currents or power levels; used in 
telecommunications to express transmission loss or gain; defined as one-
tenth of a Bel, hence the appropriate notation is dB, shown here. 
 
Deimos 
Deimos is one of the two moons of mars. 
 
Delta 
Delta is the 4th letter of the Greek alphabet.  
 
Devonian 
The Devonian was the sixth geological period, 300,000,000 years ago. It 
marked the evolution of the insects and amphibians. 
 
Dew 
Dew is a precipitation in the form of moisture that collects on the 
ground after the temperature of the ground has fallen below the dew point 
temperature of the air in contact with the ground.  
 
Didjeridu 
A didjeridu is a musical wind instrument developed by the Australian 
aborigines.  
 
Digested 
see "digestion" 
 
Digestion 
Digestion is the process of absorbing and distributing substances from 
ingested food to the body. 
 
Digitalis 
Digitalis is a drug derived from foxglove that increases heart 
efficiency.  
 
Diode 
A diode is a thermionic valve with two electrodes, or a semi conductor 
equivalent.  
 
Distributor 
In a car, the distributor distributes electrical pulses to the spark 
plugs. 
 
Dixie 
The term dixie refers to the southern states of the USA.  
 
Domesday book 
The domesday book is a record of the survey conducted in England in 1086 
by officials of William the conqueror in order to assess taxes etc.  
 
Dominoes 
Dominoes is a game played with 28 rectangular spotted tiles. It 
originated in Italy in the 18th century.  
 
Doomsday book 
see "domesday book" 
 
Doppler effect 
The doppler effect is a change in observed wavelength due to relative 
motion between the source and observer. 
 
Down's syndrome 
Down's syndrome is a chromosomal abnormality. 
 
Dram 
The dram is a unit of the avoirdupois scale equivalent to 1.772 grams.  
 
Drams 
see "dram" 
 
Draughts 
Draughts is a game played by two people on a board of 64 alternate black 
and white squares. Each player has twelve pieces, one set are black and 
the other red. 
 
Dredger 
A dredger is a ship used for picking up rubbish from waterways. 
 
Drill 
A drill is a machine for boring holes in rock, metal or wood etc. 
 
DWIM 
DWIM is an acronym for Do What I Mean. It is a term used in artificial 
intelligence for computer self-correcting of errors. 
 
Dysprosium 
Dysprosium is a rare metal element. 
 
Earth 
The earth is the third planet from the sun. 
 
Eclipse 
An eclipse is the passage of a celestial body through the shadow of 
another.  
 
Ecstasy 
Ecstasy is an illegal drug synthesized from nutmeg oil and that reduces 
serotonin in the brain. 
 
Eczema 
Eczema is an inflammatory skin disease. 
 
EDAAS 
EDAAS is an expert system that uses its knowledge of both the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (USA) and criteria for classifying information as 
confidential to help information specialists decide which information 
about the manufacturing and distribution of toxic chemicals must be 
released to the public and which information may be withheld for 
proprietary purposes. EDAAS was developed for the Ebvironmental 
Protection Agency in the USA using FORTRAN. 
 
Effort 
Effort is strenuous exertion. 
 
Egg 
An egg is a body specially developed in the females of animals which when 
impregnated by a male sperm developes into the young of the animal. 
 
Element 
An element is a substance that cannot be split chemically into simpler 
substances.  
 
Elements 
see "element" 
 
Elgin marbles 
The elgin marbles are a collection of ancient Greek sculptures assembled 
by the 7th earl of Elgin and brought to England in 1812  
 
Embassy 
An embassy is an ambasador's residence. 
 
Embryo 
An embryo is the offspring of an animal before it has been born or 
emerged from its egg.  
 
Empyema 
Empyema is a pathological term describing a collection of pus in a 
cavity, especially applied to pus in the pleural cavity of the lung. 
 
Energy 
In physics, the term energy refers to an object's capacity to do work. 
This capacity is related to the strength of the flow of electrons in the 
object, or, in the case of potential energy, the amount of energy stored 
in the object. Thus, a powerful object such as the sun expells an 
enormous flow of electrons as solar energy, and a single atom of hydrogen 
contains the pathetic energy of a single electron orbiting its nucleus.  
 
Enzyme 
An enzyme is a biological catalyst that is not itself destroyed in the 
conversion process.  
 
Eocene 
The Eocene was the fourteenth geological period, 50,000,000 years ago.  
 
Epigram 
An epigram is a short witty or poignant poem. 
 
Epigraph 
An epigraph is an inscription carved on a stone, statue or coin.  
 
Erbium 
Erbium is a metal element.  
 
Ergonomics 
Ergonomics is a discipline treating the consideration of human factors in 
design of the working environment and its components; intended to promote 
productivity and safety in the tools people work with.  
 
Ester 
Ester is an organic compound formed by the reaction between alcohol and 
acid with the elimination of water. 
 
Etch 
see "Etching" 
 
Etching 
Etching is a process of putting a drawing or design onto a surface, 
usually metal, by corroding or scratching away the top surface so as to 
form the lines of the design. 
 
Ethane 
Ethane is a paraffin hydrocarbon. 
 
Ethanoic acid 
Ethanoic acid is an organic fatty acid. 
 
Ethanol 
Ethanol is the chemical name for alcohol. 
 
Ethene 
Ethene is an alkene hydrocarbon gas.  
 
Ether 
Ether is an anaesthetic. It has the formulae (c2h5)2o.  
 
Ethernet 
Ethernet was originally the trade name for a LAN developed by Xerox 
Corporation and later supported by Digital Equipment Corporation, Intel 
Corporation and Hewlett-Packard. It is now standardized as IEEE 
specification 802.3 . 
 
Eugenics 
Eugenics is the science of selective breeding to control physical and 
mental characteristics. 
 
European 
see "Europe" 
 
Europium 
Europium is a rare metal element. 
 
Farad 
The farad is the unit of measurement of electrical capacitance. 
 
Fathom 
Fathom is a nautical measurement, being 2 metres. 
 
Fatty acid 
A fatty acid is an organic hydrocarbon with a carboxyl group at one end.  
 
Feet 
Feet is the plural of foot. 
 
Fermentation 
Fermentation is the breakdown of sugars by bacteria and yeast.  
 
Fermium 
Fermium is a man made, radioactive metal element. It is named after 
Enrico Fermi. 
 
Ferret 
A ferret is a domesticated polecat. 
 
Ferrous 
Ferrous is a chemistry term refering to materials which contain iron. 
 
Fiber Optics 
Fiber Optics is a technology using light as a digital information bearer. 
Fiber optic cables ( light guides ) are a direct replacement for 
conventional wire, coaxial cable and many forms of radio, including 
microwave.  Fiber optic lines actually cost less, occupy less space and 
provided far more transmission capacity than earlier methods, while 
providing superior quality due to virtual immunity to electrical 
interference. 
 
Fife 
A fife is a small flute originating from Switzerland. 
 
Flugelhorn 
The flugelhorn is a brass musical instrument. 
 
Fluorescence 
Fluorescence is the process of emission of electromagnetic radiation 
resulting from the absorption of certain types of energy.  
 
Fluoride 
Fluoride is the salt of hydroflouric acid.  
 
Fluorocarbon 
A fluorocarbon is a compound in which hydrogen atoms of a hydrocarbon 
have been replaced with fluorine. 
 
Foal 
A foal is a young horse.  
 
Fog 
Fog is a cloud that collects at the surface of the earth. 
 
Folic acid 
Folic acid is a b vitamin, a lack of folic acid causes anaemia. 
 
Fondant 
Fondant is a soft sweet made of flavoured sugar.  
 
Foolscap 
Foolscap is a regular paper size of 13.5 by 16.5 inches, so called 
because it was originally water-marked with a fool's head and cap. 
 
Foot 
The foot is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 12 inches or 30.48 centimetres. 
 
Forecastle 
The forecastle is a short deck in the forepart of a warship. In merchant 
ships it is the forepart of the ship where the sailors live. 
 
Forelock 
A forelock is a wedge put through a hole in a bolt to keep the bolt in 
place. 
 
Foresheets 
The foresheets is the inner part of the bows of an open boat where the 
bowman stands. 
 
Forest 
Forest is a term properly applied to an extensive woodland or to a large 
tract of mingland woodland and open uncultivated land. In English law, a 
forest was a territory priveledged for game generally belonging to the 
sovereign and set aside for his recreation.  
 
Forge 
A forge is a blacksmith's fireplace or furnace for melting and refining 
metal.  
 
Fortissimo 
Fortissimo is a musical term directing the singers to sing with the 
utmost strength and loudness. 
 
Frail 
A frail is a rush basket for packing figs and raisins.  
 
Frangulin 
Frangulin is a yellow crystallizable dye extracted from the bark of the 
alder. It is used to dye wool, silk and cotton. 
 
Frankincense 
Frankincense is an incense derived from the resin of the tree boswellia.  
 
Friday 
Friday is the fifth day of the week, the name derives from the Saxon 
Frige-doeg, the day sacred to Freya. 
 
Frith Gild 
A Frith Gild was a Saxon voluntary association of neighbours for purposes 
of order and self-defence. They repressed theft, traced stolen cattle and 
indemnified parties robbed from a common fund raised by subscription of 
the members.  
 
Fructose 
Fructose is a simple and very sweet sugar found in plant juices, fruit 
and honey. 
 
Fruit 
Fruit is a botanical term for the mature ovary of a plant comprised of 
two parts, the pericarp and the seed.  
 
Full Duplex 
Full Duplex is a communications term refering to a circuit which allows 
independent transmission information in both directions simultaneously. - 
Synonym:  In wire telephony, 4 wire circuit.  
 
Furlong 
The furlong is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 10 chains, 220 yards or 201.168 metres. The name fulong 
derives from furrow-length.  
 
Furlongs 
see "furlong" 
 
Fuse 
a fuse is a slow burning cord or other mechanism for delaying igniting a 
charge, such as a mine. Early fuses (slow-matches) were made of lightly 
twisted hemp dipped in potassium nitrate and ignited. Modern fuses may be 
electrical attached to a timer, or chemical in which an acid burns away a 
division in a container holding two chemicals which ignite when combined.  
 
Gabilla 
Gabilla is a Cuban measurement of tobacco. One gabilla is comprised of 36 
or 40 leaves, 4 gabillas comprise 1 hand and 80 hands comprise 1 bale.  
 
Gadolinium 
Gadolinium is a metal element.  
 
Gaff 
A gaff is a spar used in ships to extend the upper edge of fore-and-aft 
sails which are not set on stays. 
 
Galactose 
Galactose is a sugar formed together with glucose when lactose is boiled 
in dilute acids. 
 
Galaxy 
A galaxy is a congregation of stars held together by gravity. 
 
Galley-slave 
A galley-slave was a convict forced to work at the oar on board a galley, 
being chained to the deck. It was a punishment common in France untill 
1748.  
 
Gallic Acid 
Gallic Acid (C7H6O5) is an acid which was first procured from the gall-
nut by Scheele in 1786. It occurs in the seeds of the mango, acorn, tea, 
walnut and many other plants and is a decomposition product of tannic 
acid. It is used as an important black dye and is an ingredient in ink. 
 
Galliot 
A galliot was a Dutch or Flemish ship used for transporting cargo in the 
late 19th and early 20th century. It had very rounded ribs and a flatish 
bottom, with a mizzen-mast placed near the stern, carrying a square main-
sail and main-top-sail.  
 
Gallium 
Gallium is a rare metal element.  
 
Gallon 
The gallon is a unit of capacity measurement equivalent to 4 quarts or 
4.546 litres.  
 
Galvanometer 
A galvanometer is an instrument for measuring an electric current by the 
defelction of a magnetic needle. Basically, it is comprised of a coil 
beneath a suspended magnetic needle. When electric current passes through 
the coil it sets up a magnetic field and attracts the needle, the 
stronger the current the more powerful the magnetic field and the more 
pronounced the needle's deflection from the earth's magnetic field. 
 
Ganja 
Ganja was originally the Indian name for the dried shoots of the female 
hemp plant which have hashish resin on them. Today it is a Jamaican slang 
expression for cannabis and hashish.  
 
Gas 
Gas is a form of matter where the molecules move randomly.  
 
Gaseous 
see "gas" 
 
Gauge 
A gauge is any scientific measuring instrument - for example, a wire 
gauge or a pressure gauge. The term is also applied to the width of a 
railroad or tramway track. 
 
Gauss 
Gauss is the c.g.s. unit (symbol Gs) of magnetic induction or magnetic 
flux density, replaced by the SI unit, the tesla, but still commonly 
used. It is equal to one line of magnetic flux per square centimeter. The 
Earth's magnetic field is about 0.5 Gs, and changes to it over time are 
measured in gammas (one gamma equals 10-5 gauss). 
 
Gemini 
Gemini is a sign of the zodiac. 
 
Genus 
In scientific classification, a genus is an assemblage of species 
posessing certain characteristics in common by which they are 
distinguished from others.  
 
Geode 
A geode is a round hollow nodule containing earthy matters, soemtimes 
quartz, sometimes agate. Geodes are found in most volcanic rocks and are 
formed by water depositing materials in the hollows of these rocks.  
 
Geophagism 
Geophagism is the practice of eating some kind of earthy matter, such as 
rock or chalk. It is most common amongst non-industrialised races, and 
was once thought to allay hunger. However, new evidence suggests that 
some peoples obtain valuable minerals in their diet from geophagism, as 
those minerals are not available in their normal food.  
 
Geosynchronous Orbit 
Geosynchronous Orbit is a position at an approximate altitude of 37 km 
above the Equator, where a velocity of about 2 km per hour in the same 
direction as Earth's rotation makes a satellite appear stationary over 
the Earth's surface.  At such a point, ground-based microwave antennae 
can remain fixed and achieve linkage with transponders on board the 
satellite to produce a microwave relay between points as much as one-
third of the way around the globe, or about 13 km; this concept first 
proposed by British physicist and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke 
in a 1947 publication. 
 
Geotropism 
In botany, the term geotropism refers to a disposition or tendancy to 
turn towards the earth. 
 
German Silver 
see "Nickel_Silver" 
 
Germanium 
Germanium is a metal element used in the manufacture of electronic 
semiconductors.  
 
Gestation 
Gestation is the period which elapses between the impregnation of any 
mammal and the birth of the offspring. Gestation varies from 25 days in 
the case of the mouse to 620 days for an elephant, with the normal human 
gestation lasting 270 days (9 months). 
 
Gibus 
The gibus is a type of opera hat named after its maker. 
 
Gin 
Gin is an alcoholic beverage flavoured with juniper.  
 
Glass 
Glass is a brittle substance made by fusing silica. 
 
Glucic Acid 
Glucic Acid is an acid produced by the action of alkalies on glucose or 
of acids on cane-sugar. 
 
Glucose 
Glucose is a simple form of sugar with the formulae c6h12o6.  
 
Glucoside 
The glucosides are a group of carbon compounds occurring in plants, and 
characterized by the fact that on hydrolysis or saponification with 
dilute acids a sugar, usually glucose, is formed along with other 
products. 
 
Gluten 
Gluten is a tough elastic substance of a greyish colour which becomes 
brown and brittle by drying, found in the flour of wheat and other grain. 
It contributes much to the nutritive quality of flour, and gives tenacity 
to its paste. 
 
Glycine 
Glycine is a simple amino acid. 
 
Glycogen 
Glycogen is a polysaccharide retained in the liver as a carbohydrate 
store. 
 
Golf 
Golf is an outdoor game in which a small ball is struck with a club.  
 
Gonidia 
Gonidia are the secondary, green, sperical cells in the thallus of 
lichens which distinguish lichens from fungi.  
 
Gonorrhoea 
Gonorrhoea is a specific contagious inflammation of the male urethra or 
the female vagina. It is a painful disease which may result in the 
chronic catarrh called gleet or may lead to stricture. 
 
Gorget 
A gorget was a piece of body armour for the protection of the throat. 
 
Gout 
Gout is a disease marked by an excess of uric acid in the tissues.  
 
Grain 
The grain is a unit of measurement of the avoirdupois scale equivalent to 
0.0648 grams. 
 
Grains 
see "grain" 
 
Gram 
Gram is the metric unit of mass; one-thousandth of a kilogram.  
 
Gravel 
Gravel is a mixture of coarse sand and small water-worn stones. The term 
may also be applied to small water-worn stones on their own. 
 
Gravity 
Gravity is the force of attraction between two objects resulting from 
their mass. 
 
Greaves 
Greaves was body armour worn at the front of the lower part of the legs 
and buckled behind the leg. 
 
Greeks 
see "Greek" 
 
Guitar 
A guitar is a stringed musical instrument played with the fingers or a 
plectrum.  
 
Gules 
Gules is the heraldic name for the colour red. It ranks highest among the 
colours.  
 
Gum arabic 
Gum arabic is obtained from the acacia. 
 
Gymnosperm 
A gymnosperm is a plant with a naked seed, there being no proper ovary 
the seeds being fertilized by the pollen coming into direct contact with 
the foramen of the ovule without the intervention of a stigma.  
 
Hackney Carriage 
see "Hackney_Coach" 
 
Hackney Coach 
Hackney Coach is the old name for a Hackney Carriage. They originated in 
London in 1625 when there were twenty of them available for hire. During 
the 19th century Hackney Coaches gave way to Hackney Cabs, which in turn 
have evolved into Hackney Carriages, now commonly called taxis.  
 
Hafnium 
Hafnium is a metal element occurring in zircon and used in nuclear 
reactors.  
 
Hajj 
Hajj is the muslim pilgrimage to Mecca. 
 
Half-hitch 
The half-hitch is a type of knot. 
 
Hallmark 
A hallmark is an official mark stamped on British gold, silver, and (from 
1913) platinum, instituted in 1327 by the royal charter of London 
Goldsmiths in order to prevent fraud. After 1363, personal marks of 
identification were added. Now tests of metal content are carried out at 
authorized assay offices in London, Birmingham, Sheffield, and Edinburgh; 
each assay office has its distinguishing mark, to which is added a 
maker's mark, date letter, and mark guaranteeing standard.  
 
Halogen 
Halogen is a particular group of elements with similar bonding 
properties.  
 
HAM-RPM 
HAM-RPM is a knowledge-based conversationalist that reasons with fuzzy 
information. It was developed at the University of Hamburg.  
 
Hashish 
Hashish is the resinous form of cannabis. 
 
Hectare 
The hectare is the metric unit of area equal to 10,000 square meters 
(2.47 acres), symbol ha. 
 
Helium 
Helium is a gaseous element.  
 
Helmet 
A helmet is an item of clothing designed to protect the head. 
 
Hepatitis 
Hepatitis is an inflammatory disease of the liver.  
 
Heptathlon 
The heptathlon is a 7 event athletics discipline. 
 
Heraldry 
Heraldry is the subject of armourial bearings.  
 
Herb 
A herb is a plant whose aerial parts do not remain above ground following 
the growing season. 
 
Heroin 
Heroin is a powerful opiate analgesic.  
 
Heuristic Dendral 
Heuristic Dendral is an expert system, developed at Stanford University, 
that establishes the structure of a molecule given the molecule's atomic 
formula and mass spectrogram. 
 
Hieroglyphics 
Hieroglyphics are signs comprising the picture writing of the ancient 
Egyptians.  
 
Himation 
An himation was a woollen cloak worn by the ancient Greeks. 
 
Hockey 
Hockey is a game played with hooked sticks and a ball.  
 
Hodometer 
A hodometer was an early device for measuring the distance travelled by a 
vehicle.  
 
Hoe 
A hoe is an instrument for cutting up weeds and loosening the earth in 
fields and gardens.  
 
Honey 
Honey is a sweet syrup made by bees from nectar.  
 
Horsepower 
 Horsepower is an imperial unit of power, now replaced by the watt. It 
was first used by the engineer James Watt, who employed it to compare the 
power of steam engines with that of horses. In the UK, one horsepower is 
equal to 550 foot-pounds per second or 745.7 watts. In the USA this 
figure has been rounded to 746 watts, and in the metric system it is 
735.5 watts. 
 
Hospital 
A hospital is an institution for caring for the sick and injured. 
 
House 
A house is a building for human habitation. 
 
Hoy 
A hoy was a small vessel, usually rigged as a sloop, and employed in 
carrying goods and passengers short distances coastwise, and sometimes in 
conveying goods and people to and from larger vessels and the shore. 
 
Humus 
Humus is partly decomposed organic matter. Found in soil. 
 
Hundredweight 
The hundredweight (cwt) is a unit of measurement of the avoirdupois scale 
equivalent to 4 quarters, 112 pounds or 50.8 kilograms. 
 
Hydrocarbon 
A hydrocarbon is a chemical containing only hydrogen and carbon.  
 
Hydrocarbons 
see "hydrocarbon" 
 
Hydrocyanic Acid 
Hydrocyanic Acid (Prussic Acid) was discovered by Scheele in 1782, and 
first prepared in a pure state by Gay-Lussac in 1811. It is found in the 
kernels of bitter almonds, peaches, apricots, plums, cherries and quinces 
and various plants leaves including beech, cherry and laurel. It is one 
of the most toxic substances known and is used to prepare cyanide.  
 
Hydrogen 
Hydrogen is a gaseous element.  
 
Hydroxide 
A hydroxide is an inorganic compound containing one or more hydroxl 
groups. 
 
Igneous rock 
Igneous rock is rock formed from cooling lava.  
 
Impalement 
Impalement is a method of execution carried out by thrusting a stake 
through the body.  
 
Inch 
The inch is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of the length 
equivalent to 25.4 millimeters. 
 
Income Tax 
Income Tax is a tax levied directly from income of every description. It 
was first levied in Britain in January 1799, then repealed in 1802 and 
reinstated the same year under the name of Property Tax. It was fixed at 
10% in 1806 and repealed in 1816 only to be reinstated in 1842. Since 
then the rate has fluctuated with the political whims of the current 
ruling party, and it is currently graduated but starting at 20%.  
 
Indian ocean 
The Indian ocean is the sea separating Africa from Australia. It has a 
total area of 73,600,000 km2 
 
Indium 
Indium is a soft, rare metal element. 
 
Indonesian 
see "indonesia" 
 
Interface 
An interface is a shared boundary between two devices. These may be a 
human and a machine for example. Computer operating systems use an 
interface to receive and transmit data to and from a human operator. 
 
Interlisp 
Interlisp is a dialect of the Lisp programming language. It is a computer 
programming language designed for procedure orientated representation. It 
has all the standard features of Lisp, plus extensive debugging 
facilities, and a DWIM self-correcting facility.  
 
Interpol 
Interpol is an international police organisation with headquarters in 
Paris.  
 
Intestinal 
see "Intestine" 
 
Invar 
Invar is an alloy of iron and nickel. 
 
Invisible 
Invisible describes something that cannot be seen.  
 
Iodine 
Iodine is a non-metal element.  
 
Ion 
An ion is a charged atom or group of atoms. 
 
Ionized 
see "ion" 
 
Ionosphere 
The ionosphere is the ionized layer of the earth's atmosphere.  
 
Iridium 
Iridium is a metal element. 
 
Iroquois cup 
The iroquois cup is an English lacrosse tournament. 
 
Irradiation 
Irradiation is the process of exposing something to radiation. It is used 
to preserve food and destroy cancer growths.  
 
Irrigation 
Irrigation is the process of supplying water to land through a series of 
artificial waterways.  
 
Isotope 
An isotope is a form of an element which has a different atomic weight 
and nuclear properties than other isotopes of the same element.  
 
Jah 
Jah is the Jamaican, and more especially the Rastafarian, name for god. 
 
Jansky 
The Jansky is the unit of radiation received from outer space, used in 
radio astronomy. It is equal to 10-26 watts per square meter per hertz, 
and is named after the USA engineer Karl Jansky. 
 
Judo 
Judo is a form of Japanese wrestling. 
 
Judy 
Judy is an English slang expression for a woman.  
 
Jujitsu 
Jujitsu is a Japanese form of self defence. 
 
Jurassic 
The Jurassic was the tenth geological period, 135,000,000 years ago. The 
first mammals evolved. 
 
Jute 
Jute is a fibre obtained from plants and used for making sacks. 
 
Kabbala 
see "Qabbala" 
 
Kayser 
The kayser is the unit of wave number (number of waves in a unit length), 
used in spectroscopy. It is expressed as waves per centimeter, and is the 
reciprocal of the wavelength. A wavelength of 0.1 cm has a wave number of 
10 kaysers. 
 
Keratin 
Keratin is a fibrous protein. 
 
Kid 
A kid is a baby goat. 
 
Knight 
Historically, a knight was an honourable military rank which was bestowed 
upon a noble who had served as a page and squire by the king. Today a 
knight is a social title bestowed upon people for supposed service to the 
crown or country, and entitles them to be called "Sir" rather than 
"Mister".  
 
Knighthood 
Knighthood is the social rank of knight.  
 
Knot 
In navigation the knot is the unit by which a ship's speed is measured, 
equivalent to one nautical mile per hour (one knot equals about 1.15 
miles per hour). It is also sometimes used in aviation.  
 
Knowledge 
Knowledge is practical understanding. 
 
Kohl 
Kohl is antimony sulphide used by women as eye make up. 
 
Koto 
The koto is a stringed musical instrument from Japan. 
 
Krypton 
Krypton is a gaseous element. 
 
Kung Fu 
Kung Fu is a form of Chinese unarmed combat.  
 
Labret 
A labret is an ornament inserted in a hole pierced through the lip. 
 
Labyrinth 
A labyrinth is a maze like structure. 
 
Lachrymation 
Lachrymation is the anatomical term for the shedding of tears.  
 
Lacrosse 
Lacrosse is a ball-game originally played by North American Indians with 
twelve players on each side, in which the ball is flung by and carried in 
the crosse, the object being to throw the ball through the opponents' 
goal.  
 
Lactic acid 
Lactic acid is an organic acid formed by certain bacteria during 
fermentation. It also occurs in the muscles when they are exercised 
vigorously. It is used in food preservation and pharmaceuticals. 
 
Lactose 
Lactose is a sugar found in solution in milk. It is the combination of 
glucose and galactose. 
 
Ladanum 
Ladanum is a gum resin extracted from plants of the genus Cistus and used 
in perfume. 
 
Ladino 
Ladino is a Spanish dialect spoken by Sephardic Jews. 
 
Lagoon 
A lagoon is a shallow stretch of salt water partly or wholly separated 
from the sea by a narrow strip of land or a low sand-bank or coral reef. 
 
Lallans 
Lallans is a Lowland Scottish language. 
 
Lamb 
A lamb is a young sheep.  
 
Lambda 
Lambda is the 12th letter of the Greek alphabet.  
 
Lambert 
The lambert is the unit of luminance (the light shining from a surface), 
equal to one lumen per square centimeter. In scientific work the candela 
per square meter is preferred.  
 
Lambrequin 
Lambrequin was originally a material covering worn over a helmet. It is 
now a term applied to a short piece of drapery hung over the top of a 
door or window. 
 
Lamella 
A lamella is a thin plate, scale or film of bone or tissue. 
 
Lamina 
The lamina is the blade on the leaf on either side of the midrib on 
flowering plants. It is usually the primary organ of photosynthesis.  
 
Lamp 
A lamp is a vessel filled with oil and fitted with a wick which is then 
used to provide light. The term has come to apply to any device which 
provides illumination, including electric lamps.  
 
Lampas 
Lampas is a horse disease with a swelling in the roof of the mouth. 
 
Lancastrian 
A Lancastrian is an inhabitant of Lancashire. 
 
Lancet 
A lancet is a fine pointed, double-edged surgical knife.  
 
Landau 
A landau is a four-wheeled carriage with a top, the back and front of the 
top can be raised and lowered independantly of each other.  
 
Landscape 
Landscape is a term applied to inland scenery, or a picture of inland 
scenery.  
 
Lane 
A lane is a narrow road, usually between hedges, or a passage way.  
 
Lanolin 
Lanolin is a wax derived from sheep's wool. 
 
Lanthanide 
The lanthanides are a group of 15 elements. 
 
Lanthanum 
Lanthanum is a rare metal element. It is a lanthanide.  
 
Lanyard 
A lanyard is a cord attached to a knife or whistle with which to hold it, 
or to serve as a handle.  
 
Laparotomy 
A laparotomy is a surgical incision through the abdominal walls into the 
abdominal cavity.  
 
Lapel 
A lapel is a part of the front of a coat which is folded back towards the 
shoulder. 
 
Lard 
Lard is the rendered and clarified internal fat from the abdomen of pigs 
or cattle used in cooking and pharmacy.  
 
Larder 
A larder is a room or cupboard used for storing provisions. 
 
Lardon 
A lardon is a strip of bacon or pork used to lard meat. 
 
Laser 
Laser is an acronym for Light amplification by stimulated emission of 
radiation. It is a device producing an intense narrow beam of light.  
 
Lassa fever 
Lassa fever is an incurable fever caused by a virus carried by a species 
of rat found in west Africa. 
 
Lasso 
A lasso is a rope with a running noose used for catching cattle.  
 
Latchet 
A latchet was a thong used for fastening a shoe.  
 
Lath 
A lath is a thin narrow strip of wood. Laths are used for supporting 
plaster, and to construct trellis. 
 
Lathe 
A lathe is a machine used for turning wood, metal and other materials by 
rotating the article against tools which cut it to shape.  
 
Laths 
see "Lath" 
 
Latin 
Latin is an Indo-European language which originated amongst the people of 
ancient Latium and the Romans.  
 
Latten 
Latten is a yellow alloy of copper, zinc, lead and tin used for making 
monumental brasses and church candlesticks.  
 
Lattice 
A lattice is a framework of laths crossed diagonally so as to form a net-
like structure to be used as a screen or door. 
 
Laudanum 
Laudanum is a tincture of opium.  
 
Lava 
Lava is the molten material expelled by a volcano. It cools to form 
igneous rock. 
 
Lawrencium 
Lawrencium is an artificial radioactive element.  
 
Laxative 
A laxative is a substance which loosens the bowels assisting or 
encouraging the excretion of faeces.  
 
Lazaret 
A lazaret is a hospital for the poor, especially for lepers.  
 
lb 
see "pound" 
 
lbs 
see "pound" 
 
Lead 
Lead is a soft, malleable, metalic element. It occurs in many ores, the 
most important of which is galena. It is a very dense metal, and is used 
as a shield in environments where radiation abounds, such as X-Rays and 
the nuclear industry.  
 
Leaflet 
In botanical terms, a leaflet is a division of a compound leaf. 
 
League 
A league was a measurement of distance, it was equivalent to roughly 3 
miles or just under 5 km.  
 
Leather 
Leather is a material prepared from the hides of dead animals.  
 
Lebensraum 
Lebensraum was the theory of living space used by the Nazis to justify 
their annexation of neighbouring states on the grounds that Germany was 
overpopulated during the 1930s.  
 
Lecithin 
Lecithin is a lipid containing nitrogen and phosphorus. It forms a vital 
part of plant and animal cell membranes. 
 
Leeward 
Leeward is a nautical expression, refering to the opposite side of the 
ship to that from which the wind is blowing. 
 
Legacy 
A legacy is a sum of money or article bequeathed by will and handed down 
from a predecessor.  
 
Leo 
Leo is a sign of the zodiac represented by a lion.  
 
Leprosy 
Leprosy is a disease of the skin characterized by the formation of 
nodules or tubercles in the skin. There are variations, one causes the 
loss of bones which results in mutilation of the limbs. 
 
Libra 
Libra is a sign of the zodiac represented by a set of scales. 
 
Light 
Light is electromagnetic radiation detectable by the eye. 
 
Link 
The link is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 7.92 inches.  
 
Lipid 
A lipid is an organic substance that is soluble in solvents such as 
alcohol but not in water. 
 
Liqueur 
A liqueur is a strong sweet alcoholic beverage with a spirit base and 
flavoured with aromatics. 
 
Lithium 
Lithium is a metal element. 
 
Lithography 
Lithography is a printing process invented by Senefelder in 1796. 
 
Litmus 
Litmus is a dye derived from lichens and used to test acidity.  
 
Logo 
Logo is a computer programming language designed to teach mathematical 
concepts. It was developed in the early 1970s in America.  
 
Lsd 
Lysergic acid diethylamide (lsd) is an hallucinogen illegal drug. 
 
Lumbago 
Lumbago is pain in the lower part of the back.  
 
Lute 
The lute is a family of stringed musical instruments that were in use 
during the 14th to 18th centuries.  
 
Lutetium 
Lutetium is a metal element.  
 
Lux 
The lux is the SI unit of illuminance or illumination (the light falling 
on an object). It is equivalent to one lumen per square meter or to the 
illuminance of a surface one meter distant from a point source of one 
candela. 
 
Magnesia 
see "Magnesium_oxide" 
 
Magnesian 
see "Magnesium_oxide" 
 
Magnesium 
Magnesium is a metal element that burns with a very bright white light. 
 
Magnesium oxide 
Magnesium oxide is formed when magnesium is burnt in the air. It is a 
white powder that is used to treat acidity in the stomach.  
 
Mal de mer 
Mal de mer is French for sea sickness.  
 
Malaria 
Malaria is an intermittent and remittent fever caused by the micro-
organism Pasmodium and transmitted by the bite of the Anopheles 
mosquitoe. 
 
Malayalam 
Malayalam is a Dravidian dialect closely related to Tamil and widely 
spoken on the west coast of south India. 
 
Malic acid 
Malic acid is an organic compound extracted from fruits.  
 
Malleable 
Something which is malleable can be hammered into a new shape with out 
fracturing or returning to its original shape. 
 
Mallet 
A mallet is a large and heavy hammer, usually made of wood. 
 
Malt 
Malt is derived from grain, usually barley, which is steeped in water and 
made to germinate which causes the grain's stach to convert into 
saccharine matter, it is then dried in a kiln and used in the brewing of 
beer, distilling of whisky and other culinary uses. 
 
Malted 
see "Malt" 
 
Maltose 
Maltose is a sugar formed naturally from starch during the germination of 
grain. It is two glucose molecules combined.  
 
Mandolin 
The mandolin is a stringed musical instrument descended from the lute.  
 
Manganese 
Manganese is a metal element. 
 
Manx 
Manx is a dialect of gaelic once spoken in the Isle Of Man. 
 
Mass 
In physics, mass is the quantity of matter which a body contains. 
 
Maund 
The maund was a unit of measurement used in India around 1900. It is 
equivalent to 40 seer. 
 
Maxwell 
The maxwell is the c.g.s. unit of magnetic flux. It is now replaced by 
the SI unit, the weber (one maxwell equals 10-8 weber). The maxwell is a 
very small unit, representing a single line of magnetic flux. It is equal 
to the flux through one square centimeter normal to a magnetic field with 
an intensity of one gauss.  
 
Maze 
A maze is a confusing network of passages and winding interconnecting 
paths.  
 
Mead 
Mead is an alcoholic beverage made from fermented honey.  
 
Meliorism 
Meliorism is the doctrine that the world may be made better by human 
effort.  
 
Melodeon 
A melodeon is a type of accordion.  
 
Melody 
Melody is the tune of a piece of music. 
 
Mendelevium 
Mendelevium is an artificial metal radioactive element. 
 
Menorah 
A menorah is a seven-branched candelabrum used in jewish worship. 
 
Menthol 
Menthol is an alcohol derivative of menthone and occurs in peppermint.  
 
Mercury fulminate 
Mercury fulminate is an explosive used in detonators and percussion caps. 
 
Metal 
Metal is a class of elements. 
 
Meteor 
A meteor is a small solid body which sails through space. 
 
Meteorite 
A meteorite is a piece of rock or metal from space. 
 
Methane 
Methane is the simplest hydrocarbon. It is an odourless gas that is 
explosive when mixed with oxygen. 
 
Methanoic acid 
Methanoic acid is a fuming liquid that occurs in stinging nettles.  
 
Methanol 
Methanol is the simplest alcohol having the formulae ch3oh. 
 
Methodism 
Methodism is a religious movement. It was founded by John Wesley, Charles 
Wesley and George Whitfield in reaction to apathy within the Church of 
England. 
 
Mezzotint 
Mezzotint is a method of engraving on copper or steel.  
 
Micrometer 
A micrometer is an instrument for measuring minute lengths or angles with 
great accuracy; different types of micrometer are used in astronomical 
and engineering work.  
The type of micrometer used in astronomy consists of two fine wires, one 
fixed and the other movable, placed in the focal plane of a telescope; 
the movable wire is fixed on a sliding plate and can be positioned 
parallel to the other until the object appears between the wires.  
The movement is then indicated by a scale on the adjusting screw.  
The micrometer caliper, of great value in engineering, has its adjustment 
effected by an extremely accurate fine-pitch screw (vernier).  
 
Microphone 
A microphone is the first component in a sound recording system. It 
converts sound waves into electrical energy. A simple microphone is the 
telephone receiver mouthpiece.  
 
Microtome 
A microtome is an instrument used for cutting very thin sections of 
organic tissue for microscopic examination. 
 
Mildew 
Mildew is a growth of minute fungi. 
 
Mile 
The mile is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 8 furlongs, 1760 yards or 1.6093 kilometres.  
 
Millennium 
Millennium is a period of measurement being 1000 years. 
 
Mineral 
A mineral is an element or compound occuring naturally due to inorganic 
processes.  
 
Ming 
Ming is the name of the Chinese dynasty which ruled from 1368 to 1644.  
 
Miocene 
The Miocene was the sixteenth geological period, 25,000,000 years ago. 
The first apes evolved.  
 
mizen 
see "Mizzen" 
 
Mizzen 
A mizzen is the fore and aft sail on the after side of the mizzen-mast of 
a three-masted ship.  
 
Modem 
Modem is a contraction of the term Modulator/Demodulator. It is a device 
that modulates and demodulates signals on and off a "carrier" frequency. 
It is not limited to computer data use, thus the telco-specific term 
"data set" for data modems.  
 
Modulation 
Modulation is alterations in the characteristics of analog carrier waves, 
impressed on the amplitude, phase and/or the frequency of the wave. 
 
Molecule 
A molecule is the smallest particle of any substance that can exist and 
still exhibit the properties of the substance.  
 
Molybdenum 
Molybdenum is a metal element.  
 
Monday 
Monday is the first day of the week.  
 
Monosaccharide 
Monosaccharide is a simple carbohydrate.  
 
Month 
The month is a unit of measurement of time based upon the motion of the 
moon around the earth.  
 
Moon 
The moon is the natural satellite of the earth. It is 3476 km in diameter 
and has a mass 1/8th that of the earth. It orbits the earth every 27.32 
days. 
 
Moreen 
Moreen is a fabric made from wool or wool and cotton in imitation of 
moire. 
 
Morel 
The morel is a genus of edible mushrooms. 
 
Moroxite 
Moroxite is the crystallized form of apatite, occuring in crystals of a 
brownish or greenish-blue colour. 
 
Morphia 
see "Morphine" 
 
Morphine 
Morphine is an opium alkaloid used to treat severe pain.  
 
Mountaineering 
Mountaineering is the practice of climbing mountains. 
 
MTBF 
Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) is a statistical method developed and 
administered by the U.S. military for purposes of estimating maintenance 
levels required by various devices and systems. Since accurate statistics 
require a basis of "failures per million hours of operation," an MTBF 
estimate on a single device is not very accurate; it would take 114 years 
to see if the device really had that many failures!  Similarly, since the 
MTBF is an estimate of averages, half of the devices can be expected to 
fail before then, and half after. MTBF cannot be used as a guarantee. 
Telecommunications systems operate on the principle of "Availability," 
for which there is a body of CCITT Recommendations.  
 
Muffle 
A muffle is an arched fire-brick furnace used in assaying operations. 
 
Mullagatawny 
Mullagatawny is a soup made with meat cut into small pieces and mixed 
with rice and curry-powder. 
 
Multileaving 
Multileaving is an IBM Bisync-era method of interspersing message blocks 
for various applications on a single line. 
 
Mum 
Mum is a malt liquor made of malt wheat, oats and bean meal. It was 
brewed extensively in Brunswick at the start of the 20th century. 
 
Mummy 
A mummy is any dead body, human or animal, that has been naturally or 
artificially preserved. Natural mummification can occur through freezing, 
drying, or preservation in bogs or oil seeps. Artificial mummification 
may be achieved by embalming (for example, the mummies of ancient Egypt) 
or by freeze-drying.  
 
Mumps 
Mumps is an infectious disease which attacks the young and consists of a 
painful inflammation of the salivary glands with swelling along the neck.  
 
Mungo 
Mungo is a material similar to shoddy which is made from old woollen 
fabrics which have been torn up for remaking.  
 
Munjeet 
Munjeet is a dye obtained from the roots of the Rubia cordifolia plant 
which is grown in India. 
 
Muriatic Acid 
Muriatic Acid was a former name for Hydrochloric acid.  
 
Murrine 
Murrine vases were priceless vessels brought from Carmania in Perisa and 
used in ancient Rome as winecups where it was believed they would break 
if poison was mixed with the wine. 
 
Musk 
Musk is a substance used in perfume and obtained from the Musk-deer. Musk 
is also used in medicine as an antispasmodic. 
 
Muslin 
Muslin is a fine thin cotton fabric first imported into England in 1670 
from India. 
 
Myckle ail 
Myckle ail is the old English name for leprosy. 
 
Myrrh 
Myrrh is a gum resin produced by a tree found in Arabia. It is used as 
incense and in embalming.  
 
Myxoedema 
Myxoedema is a thyroid deficiency.  
 
NACK 
Nack (nak) is the "Negative Acknowledge" character in many data codes; 
typically used to indicate receipt of a corrupted message, ordering 
retransmission.  
 
Nail 
The nail is a unit of the imperial measurement of length equivalent to 
1/16 yards.  
 
NAK 
see "NACK" 
 
Naphthalene 
Naphthalene is a solid hydrocarbon. 
 
Napoleonic Wars 
The Napoleonic wars were a series of European wars between 1803 and 1815 
involving Napoleon and his conquests of Europe.  
 
Narcotic 
A narcotic is a sleep inducing and analgesic drug.  
 
NASA 
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) is an American 
government agency founded in 1958 for spadeflight and aeronautical 
research. Its headquarters are in Washington DC. Its main installation is 
the Kennedy Space Center.  
 
Nautical Mile 
The Nautical Mile is a unit of measurement used by ships. It is 1852 
meters long. 
 
Nebula 
A nebula is a cloud of gas and dust in space. 
 
Nematodes 
see "nematode" 
 
Neon 
Neon is a gaseous element.  
 
Neptunium 
Neptunium is an artificial element produced in nuclear reactors.  
 
Neuralgia 
Neuralgia is a pain originating from the nerves.  
 
Neurosis 
Neurosis is a mild mental condition of emotional disorders. 
 
Neurosurgery 
Neurosurgery is surgery upon the brain or spinal cord.  
 
Neutron 
The neutron is a subatomic particle.  
 
Newspaper 
A newspaper is a publication reporting and commenting upon news. The 
first newspapers were published by the Romans. 
 
Nickel 
Nickel is a metal element.  
 
Nickel Silver 
Nickel Silver (German Silver, Pack-Fong) is an alloy of copper, nickel 
and zinc in different proportions. Sometimes lead is added if the alloy 
is destined for making candlesticks or casts.  
 
Nicotine 
Nicotine is an alkaloid derived from the leaves of tobacco. 
 
Niello 
Niello is a black, metal, amalgam of sulphur added to copper, silver or 
lead and used for filling engraved lines in metal objects.  
 
Nimbostratus 
Nimbostratus is a type of cloud, low, dark grey and trailing. 
 
Nimbus 
A nimbus is a bright cloud or halo added to pictures of saints etc 
implying deity.  
 
Niobium 
Niobium is a metal element. 
 
Nitrate 
A nitrate is any salt of nitric acid. 
 
Nitrazepam 
Nitrazepam is a hypnotic drug given by mouth to treat insomnia. 
 
Nitric acid 
Nitric acid is produced by the oxidation of ammonia.  
 
Nitrogen 
Nitrogen is a gaseous element. It comprises 79 percent of the air.  
 
Nitroglycerine 
Nitroglycerine is a powerful explosive produced from nitric acid and 
glycerol.  
 
Nitrous oxide 
Nitrous oxide is an analgesic gas.  
 
Nobelium 
Nobelium is a radioactive metal element.  
 
Nocardia 
Nocardia is a bacteria found in soil which causes nocardiosis.  
 
Nocardiosis 
Nocardiosis is a disease affecting the skin, lungs and brain resulting in 
abscesses.  
 
Noose 
A noose is a loop with a running knot which tigthens as the string is 
pulled. 
 
Norse 
The term norse refers to ancient Norway.  
 
Nova 
A nova is a faint star that suddenly erupts in brightness.  
 
Nucleic acid 
Nucleic acid is a complex organic acid forming the basis of heredity. 
 
Nucleus 
The nucleus is the positively charged central part of an atom.  
 
Numismatics 
Numismatics is the study of coins and medals. 
 
Nylon 
Nylon is a synthetic plastic similar in chemical structure to protein.  
 
Obeah 
Obeah is a form of witchcraft practised in the Caribbean. 
 
Oboe 
The oboe is a musical instrument of the woodwind family.  
 
Obsidian 
Obsidian is volcanic glass. 
 
Ohm 
The ohm is the SI unit of electrical resistance. It was originally 
defined with reference to the resistance of a column of mercury, but is 
now taken as the resistance between two points when a potential 
difference of one volt between them produces a current of one ampere.  
 
Ohm's law 
Ohm's law is that the steady current in a metal circuit is directly 
proportional to the constant total electromotiveforce in the circuit, 
that is e/i = r 
 
Oil 
Oil is a large group of viscid liquids which have a characteristic smooth 
and sticky feel, are lighter than water, are inflammable and chemically 
neutral.  
 
Oligocene 
The Oligocene was the fifteenth geological period, 42,000,000 years ago.  
 
Opera 
Opera is a stage entertainment consisting of a play sung to music in its 
entirety, with no spoken dialogue at all. Opera originated in Italy 
around 1600 and has subsequently spread throughout the world.  
 
Opium 
Opium is a drug extracted from the seeds of the opium poppy.  
 
Ordovician 
The Ordovician period was the fourth geological period, 375,000,000 years 
ago.  
 
Organic 
In chemistry, the term organic refers to substances which occur naturally 
as constituents of organized bodies.  
 
Origami 
Origami is the art of paper folding.  
 
Osmium 
Osmium is a metal element.  
 
Ounce 
The ounce is a unit of measurement of the avoirdupois scale equivalent to 
16 drams or 28.350 grams. 
 
Ounces 
see "ounce" 
 
Oxalic acid 
Oxalic acid is a poison found in rhubarb. 
 
Oxidation 
Oxidation is the chemical combination of atoms with oxygen atoms to form 
oxides. In metals, the process appears as rust, iron rust being iron 
oxide, a molecule formed of iron atoms combined with oxygen atoms.  
 
Oxidize 
The term oxidize refers to the chemical reaction of oxidation.  
 
Oxygen 
Oxygen is a gaseous element that is partly soluble in water. It is the 
only gas able to sustain respiration.  
 
Oxytocin 
Oxytocin is a hormone that stimulates the uterus in late pregnancy to 
initiate and sustain labour.  
 
Ozone 
Ozone is a blue gas. The molecules are comprised of three oxygen atoms. 
 
Pacemaker 
A pacemaker is an electronic device that stimulates the heart muscles by 
delivery small electric shocks to it.  
 
Pack-Fong 
see "Nickel_Silver" 
 
Packet 
In the sense of communications, a packet is a structured group of binary 
digits in a prearranged sequence containing synchronism, address, control 
an error-checking data.  Specialized synonym for a "block" of data in 
CCITT Packet Data Network standards. 
 
Packet Switched Network 
A Packet Switched Network is a network dedicated to the routing and 
delivery of data put in the form of standardized "packets." 
 
Packet Switching 
Packet Switching is the technique in which a stream of data is broken 
into standardized units called "packets," each of which contains address, 
sequence, control, size and error checking information in addition to the 
user data.  Specialized packet switches operate on this added information 
to move the packets to their destination in the proper sequence and again 
present them in a contiguous stream.  
 
Paleocene 
The Paleocene wa the thirteenth geological period, 80,000,000 years ago.  
 
Palladium 
Palladium is a metal element. 
 
Pancratium 
A pancratium is an athletic contest in wrestling and boxing.  
 
Paracetamol 
Paracetamol is an analgesic. Over doses of paracetamol can cause liver 
damage.  
 
Paraffin 
Paraffin is a family of hydrocarbons. 
 
Parallax 
The term parallax describes the apparent movement of an object when 
viewed from two different positions.  
 
Parallel Transmission 
Parallel Transmission is the simultaneous transmission of all parts of a 
signal at one time; in data transmission, requiring a separate signal 
path for each of the bits of a character; internal to computers, this is 
called a "parallel bus."  
 
Parchment 
Parchment is a type of fine writing paper traditionally made from sheep 
or goat skin. 
 
Parity 
In communications systems and computers, parity is a constant state of 
equality; one of the oldest and simplest methods of error checking data 
transmission. Characters are forced into parity (total number of marking 
bits odd or even as selected by choice) by adding a one or zero bit as 
appropriate when transmitted; parity is then checked as odd or even at 
the receiver. 
 
Parity Bit 
A Parity Bit is a check bit appended to an array of binary digits to make 
the sum of all the digits always odd or always even.  
 
Parity Check 
Parity Check is a checking method that determines if the sum of all the 
digits in an array is odd or even.  
 
Parsec 
A parsec is an astronomical unit of distance equivalent to 3.2616 light 
years.  
 
Pasteurization 
Pasteurization is a preservative heat treatment applied to foods, notably 
milk. 
 
Pcp 
Pcp is an abbreviation for phencyclidine. 
 
PDS 
PDS is an abbreviation for Portable Diagnostic System. It is an expert 
system which diagnoses faults in machinery from information received from 
sensors connected to the machinery. Sensor readings are compared with 
known data about component malfunction symptoms to diagnose faults.  
 
Peat 
Peat is a fibrous organic compound found in bogs that is formed by the 
partial decomposition of plants. 
 
Peck 
The peck is a unit of capacity measurement equivalent to 2 gallons or 
9.092 litres. 
 
Pentagon 
A pentagon is a five sided regular polygon. 
 
Pentathlon 
The pentathlon is a five sport competition. 
 
Pentode 
A pentode is an electronic amplifying valve with 5 main electrodes. 
 
Pentose 
A pentose is a sugar with 5 carvon atoms in the molecule. 
 
Penumbra 
A penumbra is a partly shaded region around the shadow of an opaque body. 
The term is especially applied to describe the partly shaded region 
around a total eclipse of the sun or moon.  
 
Perception 
Perception is the ability to observe and understand, particuarly 
intuitively. 
 
Percolator 
A percolator is a device for making coffee by allowing water to filter 
repeatedly through ground coffee.  
 
Pericarp 
The pericarp is the wall of the ripened ovary of a plant. 
 
Pericarps 
see "Pericarp" 
 
Perigee 
Perigee is an astronomical term refering to the position in the Moon's 
orbit nearest to the earth, opposite to Apogee.  
 
Perigynous 
A perigynous plant is one which has stamens situated around the pistil or 
ovary.  
 
Permafrost 
Permafrost is the permanently frozen subsoil in Arctic regions. 
 
Permaid 
Permaid is an expert system, developed at Honeywell for trouble shooting 
large disk drives. 
 
Permalloy 
Permalloy is a nickel steel alloy, containing about 78 percent nickel. It 
is charcterized by a very high permeability in low magnetic fields. It is 
extensively used in submarine cables. 
 
Permanganate 
A permanganate is any salt of permanganic acid. 
 
Permian 
The permian was the eigth geological peiod, 205,000,000 years ago. It 
marked the evolution of the reptiles. 
 
Persimmon 
The persimmon is a yellow-orange plum-like astringent fruit. It becomes 
sweet when softened by frost. 
 
Pewter 
Pewter is an alloy of tin and lead. 
 
Phencyclidine 
Phencyclidine is an illegal drug also known as angel dust.  
 
Phenol 
Phenol is a compound derived from coal tar and used in the manufacture of 
nylon.  
 
Phosphate 
A phosphate is any salt of phosphorus oxy acids.  
 
Phosphorus 
Phosphorus is a non-metallic element. 
 
Photosynthesis 
Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert carbon dioxide into 
carbohydrates by chlorophyll under the influence of light.  
 
Piano 
The piano is a musical instrument with a keyboard. It was invented in the 
18th century as a development of the harpsichord. Strings are stuck by 
hammers when the keys are depressed. 
 
Pica 
Pica is a size of print (12 point) giving about 6 lines to the inch.  
 
Picador 
A picador is a horse-mounted, lance armed bull fighter. 
 
Picaroon 
A picaroon was a name for pirate or pirate ship.  
 
Piccolo 
The piccolo is a woodwind instrument of the flute family. 
 
Pilau 
Pilau is an oriental dish of rice with meat or fish and spices. 
 
Pinchbeck 
Pinchbeck is an alloy of 80% copper and 20% zinc once used for making 
cheap watch cases, and more recently as a substitute for the more 
expensive bronze. It was invented by a London watchmaker in the 18th 
century. 
 
Pint 
The pint is a unit of capacity measurement equivalent to 4 gills or 0.568 
litres. 
 
Pitch 
Pitch is the highness or lowness of a musical sound.  
 
Piton 
A piton is a metal spike used in mountaineering as a support for a 
belaying pin.  
 
Pitpan 
A pitpan is a Central American dug-out boat.  
 
Planet 
A planet is a heavenly body which orbits a star.  
 
Planimeter 
A Planimeter is a simple integrating instrument for measuring the area of 
a regular or irregular plane surface. It consists of two hinged arms: one 
is kept fixed and the other is traced around the boundary of the area. 
This actuates a small graduated wheel; the area is calculated from the 
wheel's change in position. 
 
Plant 
A plant is a living organism of the vegetable kingdom. Generally they are 
capable of living wholly on inorganic substances. They lack locomotion 
and special organs of sensation and digestion. 
 
Plantation 
A plantation is a an assemblage of planted and growing plants.  
 
Plants 
see "Plant" 
 
Plaster of Paris 
Plaster of paris is calcium sulphate mixed with water to make casts.  
 
Plastic 
Plastic is a group of synthetic polymers made from oils and which are 
capable of being moulded into shape by heat or pressure or both.  
 
Pleistocene 
The Pleistocene (ice age) was the seventeenth geological period, 500,000 
years ago. It marked the evolution of tool-making man. 
 
Pliocene 
The Pliocene was the sixteenth geological period, 8,000,000 years ago. It 
marked the modern formation of the continents.  
 
Plough 
A plough is an agricultural implement used for tilling the soil.  
 
Plutonium 
Plutonium is an artificial radioactive metal element. 
 
Pneumonia 
Pneumonia is an inflammation of the lung due to infection.  
 
Poison 
see "Toxin" 
 
Poisonous 
see "Toxic" 
 
Polio 
Polio is a virus infection of the central nervous system affecting nerves 
that activate muscles.  
 
Polka 
The polka is a lively folk dance. 
 
Polonium 
Polonium is a metal radioactive element.  
 
Polyester 
Polyester is a thermosetting plastic used in the manufacture of synthetic 
fabrics.  
 
Polyethylene 
Polyethylene is a thermosetting plastic polymer of ethylene.  
 
Polymer 
A polymer is a compound made up of large molecules composed of many 
repeated simple units.  
 
Polypus 
Polypus is a small benign tumour of the skin due to local overgrowth of 
the celss.  
 
Polysaccharide 
A polysaccharide is a long chain of carbohydrate made up of hundreds of 
linked simple sugars, such as glucose.  
 
Poor laws 
The poor laws were an act of parliament between 1562 and 1601 which gave 
local authorities the responsibility for settling and supporting the poor 
in England.  
 
Potassium 
Potassium is a metal element. 
 
Poundal 
The poundal is the imperial unit of force, now replaced in the SI system 
by the newton. One poundal equals 0.1383 newtons. It is defined as the 
force necessary to accelerate a mass of one pound by one foot per second 
per second.  
 
Praseodymium 
Praseodymium is a metal element used as a pigment in glass. 
 
Pre-Cambrian 
The Pre-Cambrian period was the second geological period. It was the time 
when the first animal life appeared, about 1,125,000,000 years ago. 
 
Presto 
Presto is a musical term designating a faster rate of movement than that 
indicated by allegro.  
 
Primates 
see "primate" 
 
PROLOG 
Prolog is a computer programming language used mainly for artificial 
intelligence.  
 
Promethium 
Promethium is a metal element.  
 
Propaganda 
Propaganda was an association established in Rome in 1622 for the purpose 
of diffusing a knowledge of Roman Catholicsim throughout the world. 
 
Propane 
Propane is a gaseous hydrocarbon found in petroleum. It has the formulae 
c3h8.  
 
Propene 
Propene is an alkene hydrocarbon. 
 
Propylaea 
Propylaea is an architectural term refering to the entrance to a Greek 
temple.  
 
Protactinium 
Protactinium is a rare actinide element.  
 
Protein 
Protein is a long chain molecule made up of amino acids joined by peptide 
bonds. Protein forms the structural material of bodily tissues. 
 
Proteins 
see "protein" 
 
Protium 
Protium is an isotope of hydrogen.  
 
Proton 
A proton is a positively charged sub atomic particle. 
 
Prussic Acid 
see "Hydrocyanic_Acid" 
 
Psychoanalysis 
Psychoanalysis is a theory and treatment method for neuroses developed by 
Freud.  
 
Psychology 
Psychology was originally thought of as a department of philosophy which 
dealt with the mind. Today, it is recognised as the science of the 
nature, function and phenomena of the human mind and human behaviour. 
 
Pub 
A pub is a house licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic 
beverages.  
 
Pump 
A pump is a machine for moving fluid from one place to another. 
 
Pumpernickel 
Pumpernickel is a German wholemeal rye bread. It is dark brown and often 
sweetened and spiced.  
 
Punch 
A punch is a machine for making or starting holes.  
 
Purple 
Purple is a secondary colour compounded by the union of the primaries 
blue and red. As a dye it was originaly obtained from Tyrian dye. 
 
Pus 
Pus is a yellowish liquid that forms in the body as a result of bacterial 
infection.  
 
Pyramids 
In billiards, pyramids is a game played with 15 red balls and 1 white 
ball. The red balls are placed together in the shape of a triangle, or 
pyramid at the spot. The object of the game being to pot the most balls. 
This game was popular around 1900, and may perhaps have developed into 
the modern game of Pool. 
 
Pyrogallic Acid 
Pyrogallic Acid (pyrogallol) is an acid obtained by the dry distillation 
of gallic acid. It forms colourless, odourless crystals, is readily 
soluble in water, alcohol and ether and its alkaline solution readily 
absorbs oxygen. It is used as a developer in photography.  
 
Pyrogallol 
see "Pyrogallic_Acid" 
 
Pyrometer 
A pyrometer is a device for measuring temperatures outside of the range 
of a mercurial thermometer. 
 
Pyrophone 
A pyrophone is a musical instrument, in which the various notes are 
produced by the burning of hydrogen gas within glass tubes of varying 
lengths and sizes.  
 
Pyrrhic Dance 
The Pyrrhic Dance was an ancient Greek dance which consisted of moves 
representing an attempt to avoid the strokes of an enemy in battle. It 
was viewed as a kind of training for war.  
 
Pyx 
A pyx was a covered vessel used in the Roman Catholic church to contain 
the consecrated host. In ancient times it was sometimes made in the shape 
of a dove.  
 
Pyxidium 
In botany, a pyxidium is a capsule with a lid, as seen in the henbane and 
in the fruit of the monkey-pot tree.  
 
Qabbala 
The Qabbala (Cabala, Caballa, Kabbala) is an ancient esoteric tradition 
of the Jews. It was supposedly given to Moses on mount Sinai in a 
revelation. 
 
Qabbalistic 
see "Qabbala" 
 
Quadriga 
The Quadriga was an ancient Greek and Roman two-wheeled chariot drawn by 
four horses abreast and used for racing. 
 
Quaestor 
A Quaestor was ancient Roman magistrate who was concerned with receiving 
taxes and tribunes, paying the troops and generally looking-after the 
money. 
 
Quandang 
Quandang is the edible fruit of a species of the sandalwood tree. 
 
Quart 
The quart is a unit of capacity measurement equivalent to 2 pints or 
1.136 litres.  
 
Quarter 
The quarter is a unit of measurement of the avoirdupois scale equivalent 
to 28 pounds or 12.7 kilograms. The quarter is a unit of capacity 
measurement equivalent to 8 bushels or 2.909 hectolitres.  
 
Queen's prize 
The queen's prize is an English shooting competition. 
 
Quinine 
Quinine is an anti malaria drug derived from the bark of the cinchona 
tree. 
 
Radar 
Radar is a system of locating an object or direction finding using high 
frequency radio waves.  
 
Radian 
The radian is the SI unit (symbol rad) of plane angles, an alternative 
unit to the degree. It is the angle at the center of a circle when the 
center is joined to the two ends of an arc equal in length to the radius 
of the circle. There are 2pi (approximately 6.284) radians in a full 
circle (360 ).  One radian is approximately 57 , and 1  is pi/180 or 
approximately 0.0175 radians. Radians are commonly used to specify angles 
in polar coordinates.  
 
Radiation 
Radiation is the emission of energy rays from an object. In particular 
the term is applied to the emission of X-rays. 
 
Radioactive 
Radioactive elements are those of high atomic weight (radium, thorium, 
uranium etc) which spontaneously emit alpha, beta or gamma rays. 
 
Radium 
Radium is a radioactive gaseous element.  
 
Rain 
Rain is condensed moisture from the atmosphere which falls to the ground 
in visible separate drops. 
 
Rayon 
Rayon is an artificial silk made from cellulose.  
 
Recorder 
The recorder is a woodwind musical instrument.  
 
Red 
Red is one of the primary colours. It is the colour of the spectrum which 
is farthest away from violet. Red pigments are derived from cinnabar, 
realgar, cochineal and coal-tar.  
 
Red dwarf 
A red dwarf is a cool, faint star.  
 
Red giant 
A red giant is a cool, bright star. 
 
Red-lead 
Red-lead is an oxide of lead used as a red pigment. 
 
Reefer 
A reefer is a refrigerated cargo ship.  
 
Reflex 
A reflex is an automatic response to a stimuli. 
 
Reichstag 
The reichstag was the German parliament building. 
 
Relativity 
Relativity is a theory concerning the nature of space and time propounded 
by Einstein.  
 
Renaissance 
The renaissance was an intellectual period between the 14th and 17th 
centuries. 
 
Resin 
Resin is an adhesive and inflammable substance which is insoluble in 
water secreted by plants and animals.  
 
Rhenium 
Rhenium is a metal element. 
 
Rhizome 
In botany, a rhizome is a sort of stem running along the surface of the 
ground, or partially subterranean, sending forth shoots at its upper end 
and decaying at the other. 
 
Rhodium 
Rhodium is a metal element. 
 
Rhythm 
Rhythm is the beat behind a piece of music. 
 
Ribbon 
A ribbon is a woven narrow band of silk or other material used for 
adornement.  
 
Riboflavin 
Riboflavin is vitamin b2. A deficiency of it stunts growth. 
 
Rice 
Rice is the seeds of a grass grown in marshs mainly in the orient.  
 
Ricin 
Ricin is a poison extracted from the leaves of the castor oil plant.  
 
Rickets 
Rickets is a defective growth of bone disease caused by a lack of vitamin 
d.  
 
Ricochet 
A ricochet is the rebounding of a projectile. 
 
Riddle 
A riddle is a question designed to test ingenuity or give amusement.  
 
Ringworm 
Ringworm is a fungus infection of the skin. 
 
Robe 
A robe is a long loose outer garment. 
 
Rocker 
A rocker is a curved bar fixed to an item so that it may rock.  
 
Rocket 
A rocket is a cylindrical case which can be projected as a result of the 
reaction of gases discharged from its rear when its combustible contents 
are ignited.  
 
Rococo 
Rococo is a style of decoration which originated in France and Italy in 
the 17th century. 
 
Rood 
The rood is a unit of measurement of area equivalent to 1210 square 
yards.  
 
Root 
The root is that part of a plant which is below or in the soil and serves 
to attach the plant to the soil, and conveys nourishment from the soil to 
the plant.  
 
Rope 
Rope is a stout cord in excess of one inch in circumferance.  
 
Roquelaure 
A roquelaure was a man's cloak popular in the 18th and 19th centuries.  
 
Rosaniline 
Rosaniline is a base compound of many aniline dyes. It is a basic 
compound prepared by oxidizing a mixture of aniline and toluidine by 
nitro-benzene in the presence of ferrous chloride. Rosaniline itself is a 
colourless solid, but if converted into a salt by the addition of an 
acid, it loses water and becomes coloured.  
 
Rosary 
A rosary is a string of beads used in religion. 
 
Rosetta stone 
The rosetta stone is a tablet bearing an inscription in Greek, and 
hieroglyphics. It's discovery by napoleon's soldiers in 1799 made the 
deciphering of hieroglyphics possible. 
 
Rosolio 
Rosolio is an alcoholic beverage from southern Europe.  
 
Rubber 
Rubber is coagulated latex. 
 
Rum 
Rum is an alcoholic beverage distiled from sugar cane.  
 
Russians 
see "russian" 
 
Rust 
Rust is an iron oxide.  
 
Ruthenium 
Ruthenium is a metal element. 
 
Rutherfordium 
Rutherfordium is an artificial radioactive element with a very short 
lifespan.  
 
Ryder Cup 
The Ryder Cup is an international golf tournament.  
 
Saccharin 
Saccharin is an ortho sulpho benzimide used as a substitute for sugar.  
 
Sackbut 
The sackbut is a musical instrument of the brass family.  
 
Sagittarius 
Sagittarius is a sign of the zodiac represented by a centaur armed with a 
bow and arrow.  
 
Salicylic acid 
Salicylic acid is the active chemical constituent of aspirin. 
 
Sangaree 
Sangaree is an alcoholic beverage made from wine diluted with water and 
mixed with spices and sugar and drunk iced. 
 
Satin 
Satin is a fabric made from silk or similar yarn, with a glossy surface 
on one side produced by a twill weave in which wwft-threads are almost 
hidden by the warp.  
 
Saturday 
Saturday is the sixth day of the week.  
 
Sauna 
A sauna is a steamy heat bath.  
 
Savanna 
A savanna is an extensive tropical grassland. 
 
Saxhorn 
The saxhorn is a musical instrument of the brass family. It evolved from 
the bugle-horn, but has valves instead of keys.  
 
Saxophone 
The saxophone is a metal musical instrument of the woodwind family. 
 
Scandium 
Scandium is a metal element.  
 
Sciatica 
Sciatica is a pain of the sciatic.  
 
Scoliosis 
Scoliosis is a curvature of the spine.  
 
Scorpio 
Scorpio is a sign of the zodiac represented by a scorpion.  
 
Scrabble 
Scrabble is a board game based upon a crossword puzzle. 
 
Scurvy 
Scurvy is a disease caused by a deficiency of vitamin c.  
 
Second 
The second is the basic SI unit of time, one-sixtieth of a minute. It is 
defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 cycles of regulation (periods of 
the radiation corresponding to the transition between two hyperfine 
levels of the ground state) of the cesium-133 isotope. In mathematics, 
the second is a unit of angular measurement, equaling one-sixtieth of a 
minute, which in turn is one-sixtieth of a degree.  
 
Seer 
The seer is a unit of measurement equivalent to 1 kilogramme. It was 
extensively used in India around 1900. 
 
Seiner 
A seiner is a ship which employs seine net fishing. 
 
Seismology 
Seismology is the scientific study of earthquakes.  
 
Selenium 
Selenium is a rare metal element. It was discovered in 1817 by Berzelius 
in the refuse of a sulphuric acid manufactory in Sweden. 
 
Semaphore 
Semaphore is a visual form of communication using flags.  
 
Sepsis 
Sepsis is blood or tissue poisoning caused by bacteria. 
 
Septic 
Septic is a term describing tissue in a state of sepsis. Usually the term 
is applied to cuts and wounds in an animal which have become infected.  
 
Septicaemia 
Septicaemia is a pathological term describing blood poisoning by 
bacteria.  
 
Serotonin 
Serotonin is a compound widely distributed in human tissue, particularly 
in the blood, wall of the intestine and the central nervous system. It 
acts as a neurotransmitter concerned especially with the process of 
sleep.  
 
Sextant 
A sextant is a navigational instrument for determining latitude by 
measuring the angle between a heavenly body and the horizon. 
 
Shamanism 
Shamanism is the religion of the eskimos of north America and Siberia.  
 
Sharia 
Sharia is the law of Islam. 
 
Sheep-Dog 
A Sheep-Dog is any breed of dog trained for controlling sheep, but in 
England the term is usually restricted to the Old English Sheep Dog.  
 
Sheepshank 
The sheepshank is a sailor's knot.  
 
Sheffield Plate 
Sheffield Plate is the name given to articles made of copper plated with 
silver by heat. It was invented in Sheffield in the middle of the 18th 
century.  
 
Shellac 
Shellac is a resin used to make varnish. It is derived from the lac 
insect. 
 
Sherry 
Sherry is a spanish alcoholic beverage of wine mixed with brandy. 
 
Shintoism 
Shintoism is the primary religion in Japan. 
 
Shinty 
Shinty is the Scottish name for hockey. 
 
Ship 
A ship is a vessel intended for navigating the ocean, as distinct from a 
boat which is any navigable vessel. The term ship now applies to sizeable 
boats which are intended for distant voyages.  
 
Ship-Money 
Ship-Money was a tax levied by Charles I in October 1634, ostensibly for 
the equipment of ships for the defence of the coast and maintaining 
command of the sea. The tax was deemed illegal and was a contributory 
dispute which led to the English civil War.  
 
Shire Moot 
In Anglo-Saxon England a Shire Moot was a metting of all the freemen of a 
shire for transacting judicial and administrative matters pertaining to 
the shire.  
 
Shoddy 
Shoddy is wool obtained from woollen rags and wastes and respun.  
 
Shorthand 
Shorthand is a system of graphical notation making it possible to record 
speech at greater speed than by normal writing.  
 
Shove-halfpenny 
Shove-halfpenny is a game played on a marked board in which halfpennies 
or discs are jerked from the edge along the board with the ball of the 
thumb. The object is to lodge the coins within marked areas on the board. 
It was once a popular game in English pubs.  
 
Shuffle-board 
Shuffle-board is a game played on a ship-deck in which wooden discs 6 
inches in diameter are shoved by a kind of cue into marked squares from a 
distance of about 30 feet. The game has been recorded since the 15th 
century. 
 
Sicilian Vespers 
The Sicilian Vespers was the massacre of the French in Sicily on March 
20th 1282. It was caused by a French soldier insulting a bride on her way 
to church, and resulted in the entire garrison of Charles of Anjour being 
annihilated within 3 days, putting an end to Angevin rule in Sicily. 
 
Sickle 
A Sickle is a hook-shaped steel bladed instrument used for cutting grass 
and grain. 
 
Sign 
A sign is a mark drawn upon a surface.  
 
Signet 
A signet is a private seal used on documents and personal letters. The 
privy signet is the personal seal of the British Sovereign used on 
private documents.  
 
Sikhism 
Sikhism is a religion founded by Nanak in the 15th century. 
 
Silicon 
Silicon is a non-metallic element.  
 
Silk 
Silk is a soft thread produced by the larvea of the silkworm moth.  
 
Sill 
Sill is a geological term for a sheet of igneous rock intruded into 
overlaying beds and lying nearly horizontal over a large area.  
 
Silo 
A silo is a structure for storing and preserving vegetable matter in a 
green state. 
 
Silurian 
The Silurian was the fifth geological period, 335,000,000 years ago. This 
period marked the appearance of the first land plants.  
 
Simile 
A simile is a literary device of description by comparison, as in "he 
slept like a log".  
 
Simony 
Simony is the trafficking in spiritual things. It was an offence against 
the canon law. 
 
Single Tax 
The single tax was a system of taxation proposed by Harry George. It was 
proposed that tax should be confined to land-rent, land being the real 
source of wealth. 
 
Sinn Fein 
Sinn Fein is an Irish nationalist political party. It was founded in 
Dublin in 1900 by Arthur Griffith. 
 
Sirius 
Sirius (the Dog Star) is the brightest star in the sky. 
 
Sitar 
The sitar is an Indian musical instrument similar to the lute.  
 
Skylab 
Skylab is an American space station launched in 1973. 
 
Slow-match 
Slow-match was a 19th century term for a fuse used to light mines or 
blasts.  
 
Smalt 
Smalt is a type of glass in which protoxide of cobalt has been mixed with 
common glass to produce a glass with a deep blue tinge to it. Smalt was 
discovered by a Bohemian glass blower in the 16th century.  
 
Snooker 
Snooker is a game derived from billiards. 
 
Snuff 
Snuff is powdered tobacco.  
 
Sodium 
Sodium is a metal element.  
 
Soil 
Soil is a loose covering of broken rocky material and decaying organic 
matter.  
 
Solanaceae 
The solanacea is a narcotic and poisonous family of plants which are mono 
petalous and exogenous. 
 
Solid 
A solid is a substance in which the molecules do not have free movement.  
 
Sonar 
Sonar is a method of locating underwater objects by the reflection of 
ultrasonic waves. 
 
Sonnet 
A sonnet is a 14 line poem. 
 
Sorbic acid 
Sorbic acid is found in the fruit of the rowan tree and used in food 
preservation.  
 
Sound 
Sound is the changes in air pressure detectable by the ear. 
 
Spacecraft 
A spacecraft is a vehicle used to travel through space, from one planet 
to another or to a moon, asteroid or other planetoid. 
 
Speed 
Speed is the rate of time at which something moves, travels, proceeds or 
operates.  
 
Star 
A star is a luminous globe of gas producing light by nuclear reactions. 
 
Starch 
Starch is large numbers of glucose molecules combined.  
 
Stearic acid 
Stearic acid is a long chain fatty acid soluble in alcohol but not water. 
 
Steel 
Steel is an alloy of iron and carbon. 
 
Sterling silver 
Sterling silver is an alloy of silver and copper. 
 
Stimulant 
A stimulant is a drug that acts upon the brain to increase alertness. 
 
Stotinki 
The stotinki is a unit of cuurency used in Bulgaria. 100 stotinki 
comprise 1 lev. 
 
Street 
A street is a road with houses along one or both sides of it. 
 
Streptomycin 
Streptomycin is an antibiotic.  
 
Strontium 
Strontium is a metal element. 
 
Strychnine 
Strychnine is a poisonous alkaloid with the formulae c21h22o2n2.  
 
Submarine 
A submarine is an underwater ship.  
 
Sucrose 
Sucrose is cane sugar. It is formed by the chemical combination of 
glucose and sucrose. It occurs naturally in sugar-beet and sugar-cane, in 
sweet fruits and in roots such as carrots. 
 
Suffragettes 
see "suffragette" 
 
Sugar 
Sugar is a sweet, soluble carbohydrate. 
 
Sugars 
In chemistry, the sugars are a group of carbohydrates, soluble in water 
and having a sweet taste. The group includes glucose, lactose and 
saccharose. 
 
Sulphur 
Sulphur is a non-metallic element. It has a relative hardness of 2 and a 
melting point of 108 degrees celcius. Its symbol is S. 
 
Sulphuric acid 
Sulphuric acid has the formulae H2SO4.  
 
Sun 
The sun is the star at the centre of the solar system.  
 
Sunday 
Sunday is the seventh day of the week.  
 
Supernova 
Supernova is the explosive death of a star. 
 
Swaythling cup 
The swaythling cup is a table tennis tournament.  
 
Symbol 
A symbol is something which represents something else.  
 
Synagogue 
A synagogue is a jewish place of worship. 
 
Syphilis 
Syphilis is a veneral disease (VD, STD) due to the micro-organism 
Treponema Pallidum. It is usually transmitted by sexual contact with an 
infected person.  
 
Tabaret 
Tabaret is an upholstery fabric with alternate satin and watered-silk 
stripes.  
 
Tabernacle 
A tabernacle is a temporary or slightly built dwelling, such as a hut, 
booth or tent. 
 
Tabes 
Tabes is a slow progressive emaciation. 
 
Tablier 
Historically, a tablier was the apron-like part of a woman's dress. 
 
Tachograph 
A tachograph is a device fitted to a motor vehicle which records its 
speed and distances travelled. Tachographs are often called the spy in 
the cab by lorry drivers who are restricted in how long they may drive 
for by law.  
 
Tachometer 
A tachometer is a device for measuring the velocity of machines or the 
rate of flow of liquids. 
 
Tack 
A tack is a small sharp nail, usualy with a large flat head. They are 
used for fitting a light or thin object to a more solid one, such as 
carpet to the floor. 
 
Tackle 
Tackle is a term used to describe the equipment used in a sport, 
especially fishing. In nautical terms, tackle refers to ropes and pulleys 
used for hoisting weights, sails etc.  
 
Tact 
Tact is the intuitive perception of what is correct or fitting especially 
in the context of knowing the right thing to say or how to behave in a 
situation. 
 
Taffeta 
Taffeta is a fine plain-woven usualy glossy fabric of silk or mother 
material.  
 
Taffy 
Taffy is a colloquial nickname for a Welshman. It derives from the 
supposed Welsh pronounciation of the name Davy.  
 
Tailor 
A tailor is a maker of men's outer garments or of women's garments which 
have similar characteristics such as coats, suits and riding-clothes.  
 
Taj Mahal 
The Taj Mahal is a white marbel mausoleum built at Agra by Shah Jehan in 
memory of his favourite wife who died in 1629. It took 20000 men 20 years 
to build.  
 
Tallow 
Tallow is the fat of animals, especially sheep and ox, separated by 
melting and clarifying and used for making soap, candles and other 
things.  
 
Tally 
Originaly, a tally was a piece of wood scored across with noteches 
representing an amount of debt or payment. The wood was then split in 
half lengthways and each party kept half.  
 
Talma 
A talma was a long cape or cloak worn by both men and women during the 
early part of the 19th century.  
 
Tam-o-shanter 
A tam-o-shanter is a round woolen or cloth cap with a flat baggy top much 
wider than the head band. It is named after the hero of Burn's poem "Tam 
o' Shanter". 
 
Tamal 
Tamal is a Mexican dish of crushed maize with pieces of meat or chicken, 
red pepper etc, wrapped in corn husks and baked or steamed.  
 
Tambour 
A tambour is a device used in embroidery. It is comprised of two hoops 
which fit closely one inside the other. Fabric is stretched over the the 
tambour which then holds it fast so that it may be embroidered. 
 
Tambourin 
A tambourin is a long narrow drum used in music.  
 
Tambourine 
A tambourine is a musical percussion instrument.  
 
Tammy 
Tammy is a fine woollen or wool and cotton textile fabric often with a 
glazed finish. 
 
Tampion 
A tampion is a plug for the top of an organ pipe or a cover for the 
muzzle of a gun.  
 
Tampon 
A tampon is a plug inserted into a wound or body orifice to absorb 
secretions or stop haemorrhaging.  
 
Tandem 
A tandem is a bicycle with two or more seats one behind the other.  
 
Tang 
A tang is a projection of a knife or other metal tool by which it is 
secured to its handle. 
 
Tango 
The tango was a dance from central Africa which was taken to Central 
America by African slaves and from there it became popular in Argentina 
where it was influenced by European rhythms and developed into a 
fashionable ballroom dance in around 1910.  
 
Tangram 
A tangram is a Chinese geometrical puzzle comprised of a square which is 
divided into 5 triangles, a square and a rhomboid which can then be 
fitted together to form many figures.  
 
Tankard 
A tankard is a large, one-handled drinking vessel.  
 
Tanner 
Tanner is an old English slang expression for a sixpence. More properly, 
a tanner is someone who tans hides.  
 
Tannery 
A tannery is a place where hides are tanned.  
 
Tannin 
Tannin is a substance used to tan hides, that is convert them into 
leather. Tannin is extracted from oak-galls and various barks. 
 
Tantalum 
Tantalum is a metal element.  
 
Taoism 
Taoism is an ancient Chinese system of philosophy.  
 
Taper 
A taper is a slender wax candle. The term is often used for a long wax 
coated or wooden wick used to light candles or fires at a safe distance. 
 
Tapestry 
A tapestry is a thick hand-woven fabric, usualy of wool, with a pictorial 
or ornamental design formed by the weft-threads.  
 
Tapioca 
Tapioca is a starchy granular foodstuff prepared from cassava and used in 
puddings. The name comes from the Brazilian word tipioca which translates 
as juice of cassava.  
 
Tappet 
A tappet is an arm, collar or cam within a machine which imparts 
intermittent motion. 
 
Tar 
Tar is a thick viscid inflammable black liquid obtained by the 
distillation of wood, coal or other organic substances. It is used for 
preserving timber amongst other purposes. 
 
Tarantass 
A tarantass was a large covered travelling carriage without springs, but 
balanced on long poles which served instead, and without seats. Tarantass 
were used a lot in Russia around the beginning of the 20th century.  
 
Tarantella 
Tarantella is a swift, whirling Italian dance in six-eight measure. 
 
Tarantism 
Tarantism was an obscure illness which was epidemic in southern Italy 
between the 15th and 17th centuries. It manifested itself in melancholy 
and an overwhelming desire to dance. It was popularly believed to be 
caused by the bite of the tarantula. 
 
Taraxacin 
Taraxacin is a bitter substance found in the milky juice of the 
dandelion. It was formerly used as a tonic and diuretic.  
 
Tarboosh 
A tarboosh is a man's brimless cap resembling a fez and worn alone or as 
part of a turban by Muslims in some eastern Mediterranean countries. 
 
Tarlatan 
Tarlatan was a thin and fine fabric of cotton mostly used for making 
women's ball dresses around 1900. It was cheap, but did not withstand 
washing. 
 
Tarsia-work 
Tarsia-work was a kind of marquetry popular in 15th century Italy. It 
consisted of pieces of different coloured woods inlayed into a panel of 
walnut so as to represent landscapes, figures, fruits etc.  
 
Tartan 
Tartan is a woolen cloth with stripes of various colours crossing at 
right angles especially in the distinctive pattern of a Highland clan. 
 
Tartar 
Tartar (potassium tartrate) is a white crust deposited in wine casks 
during fermentation. The purified crystals are used in cooking, and often 
called cream of tartar.  
 
Tartrate 
Tartrate is a salt of tartaric acid.  
 
Tasmanite 
Tasmanite is a translucent, reddish-brown fossil resin found in Tasmania. 
 
Tassel 
A tassel is a tuft of loosely hanging threads or cords designed as an 
ornament for a cushion, cap or other object.  
 
Tatting 
Tatting is a type of knotted lace made from sewing-thread with a small 
flat shuttle-shaped instrument.  
 
Tatty 
A tatty is a cuscus grass mat which is hung in a doorway, or window and 
kept wet to cool the air in the building. 
 
Tavla 
Tavla is the national game of Turkey. It is called backgammon in Europe.  
 
Taxi 
see "Hackney_Coach" 
 
Taxidermy 
Taxidermy is the art of preparing and mounting the skins of animals in a 
lifelike manner. In colloquial terms, stuffing dead animals. 
 
TB 
see "Tuberculosis" 
 
Technetium 
Technetium is an artificial element.  
 
Tectonics 
Tectonics is the study of rock movements. 
 
Teetotum 
A teetotum is a top spun with the fingers, rather than a whip or cord.  
 
Tellurium 
Tellurium is a semi-metallic element. 
 
Tempo 
Tempo is the pace at which a piece of music is played.  
 
Tendril 
A tendril is a slender, thread-like organ or appendage of a plant which 
stretches out and attaches itself to some other object so as to support 
the plant.  
 
Tennis 
Tennis is a game for two or four players played by striking a ball with a 
racket over a net stretched across a rectangular court. 
 
Teocalli 
A Teocalli is an Aztec or other early Mexican temple. They are usualy 
built in the form of a pyramid. 
 
Tepee 
A tepee is a conical tent, hut or wigwam used by North American indians.  
 
Terbium 
Terbium is a metal element. 
 
Tercel 
Tercel is the term for a male hawk. 
 
Terpene 
Terpene is a chemistry term for any of a large group of cyclic 
hydrocarbons which form the chief constituents of the volatile oils 
obtained by distilling plant material (Turpentine).  
 
Terrine 
A terrine is an earthenware vessel sold containing some table delicacy 
such as pate.  
 
Tessera 
A tessera was a Greek or Roman small tablet (of wood or Ivory) used as a 
token or tally.  
 
Tester 
A tester is the canopy over a four-poster bed.  
 
Tetanus 
Tetanus is a disease affecting the nervous system caused by a bacteria 
found mainly in soil.  
 
Tetrahedron 
A tetrahedron is a geometric solid figure with four triangular faces. 
 
Tetrode 
A tetrode is an electronic amplifying valve with 4 main electrodes. 
 
Thalidomide 
Thalidomide was a sedative drug prescribed to pregnant women during the 
1960s. It caused deformity of the foetus resulting in children born with 
severely stunted or non-existent limbs.  
 
Thallium 
Thallium is a metal element.  
 
Thaumatrope 
A thaumatrope is a card or disc with two different figures drawn one each 
side. These images apparently merge when the card or disk is rotated 
rapidly. Thaumatropes are used to demonstrate the persistance of visual 
impressions. 
 
Theodolite 
A theodolite is an instrument used in surveying.  
 
Thermion 
A thermion is an electrically charged particle emitted from a heated 
body.  
 
Thermistor 
A thermistor is a type of semi-conductor in which the resistance 
decreases as the temperature rises.  
 
Thermometer 
A thermometer is a device used to measure temperature.  
 
Thermostat 
A thermostat is a device which automatically maintains temperature at a 
constant value or gives notice of an undue change in temperature. 
 
Thermotaxis 
Thermotaxis is the physiology term for the regulation of an organisms 
body heat.  
 
Thespian 
A thespian is an actor or actress.  
 
Theurgy 
Theurgy was a system of magic practised by the Neoplatonists intended to 
procure communication with spirits for personal benefit and to produce 
miraculous effects with their assistance. 
 
Thiamine 
Thiamine is vitamin b1 a deficiency of which causes beri beri.  
 
Thigh 
The thigh is the upper part of the human leg between the knee and the 
hip.  
 
Thigh bone 
Thigh bone is a popular name for the femur. 
 
Thole 
A thole is a pin in the gunwale of a boat used as a fulcrum for an oar. 
There are usually two tholes between which the oar rests. 
 
Thomas cup 
The Thomas cup is a badminton tournament. 
 
Thomism 
Thomism is a system of theology and philosophy taught by St. Thomas 
Aquinas.  
 
Thong 
A thong is a narrow strip of leather used as a lace or strap. 
 
Thorium 
Thorium is radioactive metal element. 
 
Threshold 
In architecture, a threshold is a piece of stone or timber lying below 
the bottom of a doorway. 
 
Thulium 
Thulium is a metal element. 
 
Thunder 
Thunder is a loud noise whic accompanies lightning, but appears to follow 
it due to the difference at which sound and light travel. Thunder is the 
noise which occurs due to the sudden violent disturbance of the air by 
the electrical discharge. 
 
Thursday 
Thursday is the fourth day of the week. 
 
Thwart 
A thwart is a seat across a boat on which the rower sits. 
 
Thymol 
Thymol is a white crystalline phenol obtained from the oil of thyme. It 
has a pleasant aromatic smell and is used as an antiseptic. 
 
Thyroxin 
Thyroxin is a white crystalline substance which is secreted by the 
thyroid gland. 
 
Tiara 
A tiara was an ancient Persian head-dress. It is also the name of a 
jewelled coronet worn by women. 
 
Tic 
A tic is an habitual, local spasmodic contraction of muscles or twitch, 
often in the face.  
 
Tide 
Tide is a term applied to the alternate rising and falling of the sea, 
twice in each lunar day, to the attraction of the moon and the sun.  
 
Tiki 
A tiki is a Maori large wooden or small ornamental greenstone image of 
the creator of man or an ancestor. 
 
Tilbury 
A tilbury was a light open two-wheeled carriage which was fashionable 
during the first half of the 19th century.  
 
Timbale 
A timbale is a dish of minced meat, or fish cooked in a drum-shaped mould 
of pastry.  
 
Timber 
Timber is wood prepared for building, or trees which provide wood 
suitable for building with. 
 
Timber hitch 
The timber hitch is a knot. 
 
Timbrel 
A timbrel was a type of tambourine used around biblical times.  
 
Timology 
Timology is a philosophical term of a doctrine of values. 
 
Tin 
Tin is a white metal element. It occurs commonly in the ore cassiterite, 
which is found in Malaya, Indonesia, Bolivia, Zaire, Nigeria and 
Cornwall. Tin is often used to plate iron to protect it from rusting. 
 
Tincal 
Tincal is a crude form of borax found in lake-deposits in parts of Asia.  
 
Tine 
A tine is a projecting sharp point such as of a fork, harrow or stag's 
antler.  
 
Tinker 
A tinker is a person who mends things, the term especially applies to 
someone who mends pots, pans and kettles. In Scotland and Northern 
Ireland the term is often applied to Romanys.  
 
Tinnitus 
Tinnitus is the medical condition of noises in the ear which are not due 
to external sounds. It is a condition common amongst the deaf and hard of 
hearing. 
 
Tinplate 
Tinplate is steel covered in tin. 
 
Tinsel 
Tinsel is a shining mettalic material used in thin strips or threads to 
give a sparkling effect in decorations. 
 
Tippet 
A tippet was a woman's small cape or collar made of fur, or silk usualy 
with two ends hanging down in front.  
 
Tipstaff 
A tipstaff is a metal-tipped staff which is a symbol of a Sheriff's 
office. 
 
Tissue 
In biological terms, tissue is an organised mass of cells, such as any 
part of an animal's body or a plant's structure. 
 
Tissues 
see "Tissue" 
 
Titanic 
The Titanic was a supposedly unsinkable British ocean liner.  
 
Titanium 
Titanium is a metal element.  
 
Titans 
see "Titan" 
 
Toby 
A toby is a mug or small jug used for ale. They are made in various 
forms, but originally they were in the form of a stout man wearing a long 
full-skirted coat and a three-cornered hat. 
 
Toddy 
Toddy is a drink made from the fresh or fermented sap of various species 
of palm. 
 
Toffee 
Toffee is a sweet of sugar, butter and flavourings boiled together and 
then allowed to cool and harden. 
 
Toga 
A toga was an outer garment worn by citizens of ancient Rome. It was a 
flowing cloak covering the entire body except the right arm. 
 
Tokay 
Tokay is a rich sweet aromatic wine made near Tokay in Hungary. 
 
Toleration act 
The toleration act of parliament in 1689 gave the right to freedom of 
worship in England. 
 
Toll 
A toll is a tax or duty chargable for selling goods, setting up a stall, 
or travelling along a public road, bridge or ferry or for transporting 
goods by railway. 
 
Toluene 
Toluene is a liquid derived from petroleum. 
 
Tomtom 
A tomtom is a native east Indian drum usualy beaten with the hands. 
 
Ton 
The ton is a unit of measurement of the avoirdupois scale equivalent to 
20 hundredweight, 2240 pounds or 1.016 tonnes.  
 
Tondo 
A tondo is a painting or carving in relief within a circular shape. 
 
Tong 
A tong is a Chinese association. The term is especially applied to 
Chinese secret organisations.  
 
Tonsillitis 
Tonsillitis is the inflammation of the tonsils. 
 
Tonsure 
Tonsure is the religious practice of having the head shaved before 
entering the priesthood or becoming a monk.  
 
Topee 
A topee is a light pith helmet. 
 
Topiary 
Topiary is the art of clipping and trimming shrubs into ornamental 
designs. 
 
Topology 
Topology is a branch of mathematics which studies geometric objects from 
the point of view of their general shape rather than their precise 
measurements. 
 
Toponymy 
Toponymy is the study of a region's place names.  
 
Toque 
A toque is a small brimless hat made of folded or swathed material. 
 
Tor 
A tor is a craggy or rocky hill or peak. The term is most used in 
Cornwall and Devon. 
 
Torchon 
Torchon is a strong, coarse linen bobbin-lace.  
 
Toreador 
A toreador is a mounted bullfighter.  
 
Torero 
Torero is the term used for someone who fights bulls for a living.  
 
Tornado 
A tornado is a violent storm with heavy rain in which the wind rotates or 
constantly changes direction. 
 
Torque 
A torque was a necklace or collar of twisted metal worn by ancient 
Britons and Gauls. 
 
Torsel 
In building, a torsel is a block of stone or piece of wood or iron set in 
a wall to support a beam or joist.  
 
Torso 
A torso is a statue or multilated human body lacking a head and limbs.  
 
Torticollis 
Torticollis is a rheumatic or other affection of the muscles causing 
twisting and and stiffness of the neck.  
 
Tortilla 
A tortilla is a Latin American thin flat cake made of maize flour and 
baked on a flat piece of stone or iron. 
 
Torus 
In architecture, a torus is a large convex moulding, usually at the base 
of a column. 
 
Toupee 
A toupee was originaly a top-knot of hair crowning a wig. Today the term 
is used to describe any false hair piece.  
 
Tournament 
A tournament was an equestrian contest between military knights and 
others armed with lances which were common in the Middle Ages. They were 
introduced to England by the Normans.  
 
Tournedos 
A tournedos is a small piece of fillet beef grilled or sauted.  
 
Tourniquet 
A tourniquet is a bandage for stopping the flow of blood through an 
artery. 
 
Tower 
A tower is a tall structure.  
 
Tower of Babel 
see "babel" 
 
Tower of London 
The Tower of London was built as a fortress by William The Conqueror. It 
was a royal palace in the Middle Ages, and was later used as a garrison 
and prison. The crown jewels are kept at the Tower of London.  
 
Toxaemia 
Toxaemia is blood poisoning.  
 
Toxic 
Something is said to be toxic (poisonous) if when introduced into a 
living organism it destroys it or damages its health. 
 
Toxicology 
Toxicology is the study of nature and effects of poisons and their 
detection and treatment. 
 
Toxin 
Toxin refers to a toxic substance of animal or vegetable origin.  
 
Toxophilite 
A toxophilite is someone who is learning archery. 
 
Toxophily 
Toxophily is the practice of, or addiction to archery.  
 
Tracheid 
Tracheid is the water conducting component in the wood of vascular 
plants.  
 
Tracheotomy 
Tracheotomy is the cutting and insertion of a pipe into the trachea. It 
is used in such cases as the trachea is blocked so that the patient may 
breath. 
 
Trachoma 
Trachoma is a contagious form of conjunctivitis with inflammation of the 
inner surface of the eyelids. It frequently leads to blindness.  
 
Tragedy 
In the theatre, a tragedy is a play dealing with a serious theme. 
 
Tram 
A tram is a passenger vehicle, similar to a bus, which runs along rails 
on public roads. The rails are flush with the road's surface allowing 
other motor vehicles to also use the roads at the same time.  
 
Trammel 
A trammel is a fishing net consisting of a fine net hung loosely between 
verticle walls of a coarser net so that fish passing through the coarse 
net carry some of the finer net through with them and are caught in the 
resulting pocket.  
 
Trampoline 
A trampoline is a canvas sheet attached to a horizontal metal framework 
by springs to provide a resilient platform for acrobats.  
 
Transducer 
A transducer is a device which takes in power from one part of a system 
and emits power of a different kind to another part.  
 
Transept 
Transepts are the cross aisles of a church, projecting at right angles 
from the nave or choir.  
 
Transistor 
A transistor is an electronic component made of a semiconductor material 
and three or more electrodes.  
 
Transmutation 
Transmutation is a biological term whereby one species transforms into 
another through an evolutionary process. 
 
Transom 
A transom is a cross bar separating a door from the fan light above it. 
 
Transuranic 
Transuranic is a chemical term refering to artificially manufactured 
elements which have an atomic number higher than uranium.  
 
Transvestite 
A transvestite is a person who dresses in the clothes of the opposite 
sex.  
 
Trapeze 
A trapeze is a horizontal bar suspended by two ropes and used as a piece 
of apparatus by acrobats.  
 
Trapezoid 
A trapezoid is a quadrilateral shape in which none of the sides are 
parallel. 
 
Trawler 
A trawler is a fishing ship which catches fish by trawling, that is with 
a net dragged along the bottom of the sea. 
 
Treacle 
Treacle is an uncrystallized syrup produced when sugar is refined.  
 
Treadle 
A treadle is a foot operated lever used to impart motion to a machine, 
such as a sewing machine or lathe for example. 
 
Trellis 
A trellis is a structure of light bars crossing each other with open 
squares or diamond-shaped spaces between them. Trellis are used as 
screens and to support climbing plants. 
 
Trencher 
A trencher is a flat slab of wood or metal upon which meat is cut.  
 
Trental 
In the Roman Catholic church, trental is a set of 30 requiem masses said 
daily or all on one day. 
 
Trepan 
A trepan was a surgeon's cylindrical saw. 
 
Trephine 
A trephine is a surgeon's cylindrical saw with a guiding centre pin used 
for removing part of the bone of the skull. The trephine has taken over 
from the trepan. 
 
Trews 
Trews were close-fitting trousers or breeches combined with stockings 
worn by Scottish highlanders and the Irish. 
 
Triad 
A triad is a Chinese secret society. Originally a buddhist cult they are 
now crime organisation.  
 
Triassic 
The Triassic was the ninth geological period, 170,000,000 years ago.  
 
Tribology 
Tribology is the study of friction, wear, lubrication and bearing design. 
 
Tribune 
A tribune was an ancient Roman administrative officer.  
 
Trichology 
Trichology is the study of the structure, functions and diseases of hair. 
 
Tricorn 
A tricorn is a three-cornered cocked hat. 
 
Triduum 
In The Roman Catholic religion, a triduum is three days of prayer in 
preparation for a feast or other solemn occasion.  
 
Trifle 
Trifle is a sweet dish of sponge-cakes flavoured with wine or jam and 
topped with custard and whipped cream.  
 
Trilby 
A trilby is a soft felt hat with a narrow brim and an indented crown. 
 
Trimaran 
A trimaran is a boat similar to a catamaran, but with 3 hulls side by 
side. 
 
Trinitrate 
In chemistry, a trinitrate is a compound formed from 3 molecules of 
nitric acid by the replacement of the 3 hydrogen atoms by a trivalent 
element or radicle. 
 
Trinitrotoluene 
Trinitrotoluene (TNT) is a high explosive.  
 
Triode 
A triode is an electronic amplifying valve with 3 main electrodes (anode, 
cathode and grid).  
 
Trioxide 
In chemistry, a trioxide is a compound with 3 atoms of oxygen with an 
element or radical. 
 
Tripe 
Tripe is the culinary term for a ruminant's stomach.  
 
Tritium 
Tritium is an unstable isotope of hydrogen. 
 
Trocar 
A trocar is a surgical stylet with a triangular point enclosed in a metal 
tube and used for withdrawing fluid from a cavity.  
 
Trombone 
The trombone is a musical instrument of the brass family. 
 
Tropacocaine 
Tropacocaine is a local anaesthetic obtained from coca leaves grown in 
Java.  
 
Trowel 
In building, a trowel is a flat bladed tool with a short handle used for 
spreading mortar. A gardener's trowel is a scoop shaped tool with a short 
handle.  
 
Trug 
A trug is a shallow garden basket made of wooden strips and with a handle 
extending from side to side.  
 
Trumpet 
The trumpet is a musical instrument of the brass family.  
 
Tryptophan 
Tryptophan is a crystalline amino-acid formed in tryptic digestion. Its 
presence in food is essential for an animal's proper growth.  
 
Tsunami 
A tsunami is a seismic sea wave originating from any one of several 
submarine geological phenomena, such as volcanic explosions. They travel 
in the open ocean at speeds up to 640 kmh. 
 
Tuba 
The tuba is a musical instrument of the brass family. 
 
Tuberculosis 
Tuberculosis (TB) is a highly infectious disease in humans and animals 
caused by the bacteria tubercule bacillus and characterized by the 
formation of tubercles in bodily tissues, especially the lungs. 
 
Tuesday 
Tuesday is the second day of the week.  
 
Tug 
A tug is a boat used for towing other ships.  
 
Tumbrel 
A tumbrel is a type of cart, formerly used for carrying dung and 
prisoners to the guillotine during the French Revolution.  
 
Tungsten 
Tungsten is a metal element.  
 
Tunic 
A tunic was an ancient Greek and then Roman short-sleeved body garment 
reaching to the knees. Today the term applies more generally to a close-
fitting short coat of a police or military uniform.  
 
Tunnel 
A tunnel is an underground passageway.  
 
Turbine 
A turbine is a type of engine. Steam turbines often propell ships and 
power stations. Gas turbines are also used. 
 
Tutenag 
Tutenag is an alloy of copper, nickel and zinc used at one time for 
domesticware and fire-grates. 
 
Tutu 
A tutu is a dancer's short skirt made of layers of stiffened frills.  
 
Tuxedo 
A tuxedo is a man's evening dress or dinner-jacket. 
 
Tweezer 
A tweezer is a small pair of tongs used for picking up small objects. 
 
Twill 
Twill is a textile fabric with a surface of parallel diagonal ribs 
produced by passing weft-threads over one and under two or more warp-
threads.  
 
Tympanum 
Tympanum is an archeological term for the space at the back of a 
pediment.  
 
Tynwald 
Tynwald is the parliament in the isle of man. 
 
Typhus 
Typhus is an acute contagious fever transmitted to man by body-lice and 
rat-fleas infected by Rickettsia prowazekii. Typhus is characterised by 
the eruption of rose-coloured spots, extreme prostration and often 
delirium.  
 
Tyrian dye 
Tyrian dye was a purple dye derived from animal juice in the shell-fish 
murex. It was used in ancient times. Since only small quantities could be 
obtained, it's use was limited to the great and the wealthy, hence purple 
became the colour associated with majesty.  
 
Uber cup 
The uber cup is a badminton tournament. 
 
Ukulele 
The ukulele is a four stringed, small guitar. 
 
Ultramarine 
Ultramarine is a blue pigment derived from lapis lazuli.  
 
Ultrasonic 
Ultrasonic is a term refering to sound waves higher in frequency than 
15khz.  
 
Umbra 
Umbra is the astrological term for the shadow cast by a planet or 
satellite.  
 
Umbrella 
An umbrella is a light, portable screen usually circular and supported on 
a central stick. They are used as protection against the sun, and rain. 
 
United Nations 
The United Nations is an international organisation for peace and 
security. 
 
Universe 
The universe is all of space and its contents.  
 
Ural mountains 
The ural mountains are a mountain range which separate Europe from Asia.  
 
Uranium 
Uranium is a metal element. 
 
Urea 
Urea is a waste product formed when mammals break down nitrogen 
compounds.  
 
Uric acid 
Uric acid is a nitrogen containing waste product found in the urine of 
birds and reptiles, but rarely mammals.  
 
Urine 
Urine is a fluid produced by the kidneys. 
 
Valency 
Valency is a term used by chemists to describe the combining ability of 
af an element with respect to hydrogen. 
 
Valve 
In electronics, a valve is a device consisting of two or more metal 
plates enclosed in an evacuated glass bulb. One of the metal plates is 
heated, causing electrons to be emitted. If a positive charge is applied 
to the other plate, the electrons will move towards it and the valve will 
conduct electricity. Valves have largely been superseded by transitors 
which are smaller. 
 
Vanadium 
Vanadium is a metal element. Its symbol is V. 
 
Vellum 
Vellum is a type of superior parchment made from the skin of a calf, kid 
or lamb. 
 
Velocity 
Velocity is the rate of motion, that is the rate of change of position of 
a body in a given direction within a measurement of time. 
 
Vinegar 
Vinegar is a 4% solution of acetic acid.  
 
Violin 
The violin is a family of stringed musical instruments. 
 
Virgo 
Virgo is a sign of the zodiac represented by a virgin.  
 
Virus 
A virus is an infectious particle consisting of a core of nucleic acids 
enclosed in a protein shell.  
 
Viscose 
Viscose is a yellowish, syrupy solution made by treating cellulose with 
sodium hydroxide and carbon disulfide. The solution is then regenerated 
as continuous filament for the making of rayon and as cellophane. 
 
Vitamin 
Vitamins are chemical substances which are used by animal bodies for 
growth and repair of certain tissues and cells.  
 
Vitamin A 
Vitamin A (carotene) occurs in certain fats and the fatty parts of some 
foods. It is used by the human body to enable the eyes to perceive light, 
and to promote growth in children and to protect moist areas of the body 
such as the lining of the respiratory tract. 
 
Vitamin B 
Vitamin B refers to a group of over eleven vitamins. Including Thiamine, 
Riboflavin, Nicotinic Acid, Pyridoxine, Pantothenic acid, biotin and 
other substances. 
 
Vitamin C 
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is used by animal bodies for the production of 
the immune system, and maintenance of the skin and other cells. Vitamin C 
occurs almost exclusively in vegetable matter, and is destroyed by heat. 
 
Vitamin D 
Vitamin D (calciferol) is a substance which assists animal bodies to lay 
down calcium and phosphorus in bones. Vitamin D is mainly found in animal 
matter, and can also be produced by the body from sunlight.  
 
Vodka 
Vodka is an alcoholic beverage distiled from rye, potatoes, maize or 
barley.  
 
Volcano 
A volcano is a vent in the earth's crust. 
 
Volt 
The volt is the unit of electromotive force. It was named after 
Alessandro Volta. 
 
Voodoo 
Voodoo is a form of magic.  
 
Wadi 
A wadi is an irrigation canal found in arab countries.  
 
Walker cup 
The Walker cup is an international golf tournament. 
 
Warp 
Warp threads are the parallel threads which traverse a loom from end to 
end.  
 
Water 
Water is a liquid oxide of hydrogen.  
 
Water table 
The water table is the level of ground below which the rocks are 
saturated with water.  
 
Watergate 
Watergate was a political scandal in the USA resulting in the resignation 
of president Nixon in 1974. 
 
Watlingstreet 
Watlingstreet was a British Roman road extending from Dover, through 
London, St. Albans, Dunstable and Towcester into north Whales with a 
branch extending to Scotland. 
 
Wax 
Wax is a solid fatty substance. 
 
Weaving 
Weaving is the art of interlacing yarn threads or other filaments by 
means of a loom, so as to form a web of cloth or other woven fabric. Two 
sets of threads are used which traverse the web at right angles to each 
other. The first set extends from end to end of the web in parallel lines 
and is called the warp; while the other set of threads crosses and 
interlaces with the warp from side to side of the web and is called the 
weft.  
 
Wednesday 
Wednesday is the third day of the week. 
 
Weft 
Weft are threads crossing from side to side of a web and interwoven with 
warp.  
 
Welding 
Welding is the process of joining two pieces of metal together by 
hammering, pressure or fusion.  
 
Whisky 
Whisky is an alcoholic beverage made from malted barley.  
 
White dwarf 
A white dwarf is small hot star.  
 
Wightman cup 
The Wightman cup is a tennis tournament.  
 
Wine 
Wine is the fermented juice of grapes.  
 
Wolfram 
Wolfram is another name for the element tungsten. 
 
Wolframite 
Wolframite is the most important tungsten ore. It has a relative hardness 
of 5. 
 
Wood pitch 
Wood pitch is a by-product of charcoal manufacture, made from wood tar, 
the condensed liquid produced from burning charcoal gases. The wood tar 
is boiled to produce the correct consistency. It has been used since 
ancient times for filling in the spaces between the hull planks in wooden 
ships to make them watertight. 
 
Woodwind 
A woodwind instrument is one with which sound is produced by blowing into 
a tube. 
 
Wool 
Wool is the fibrous covering of sheep.  
 
Wrestling 
Wrestling is a form of combat contest between two opponents in which the 
object is to grapple the opponent to the floor.  
 
Wynd 
A wynd is a narrow street or passage off a main thoroughfare. 
 
Xanthoma 
Xanthoma is a skin disease characterized by irregular yellowish patches 
on the eyelids and neck.  
 
Xenon 
Xenon is a gaseous element. It's symbol is Xe.  
 
Xylophone 
The xylophone is a percussion musical instrument. 
 
Yacht 
A yacht is a light sailing vessel built for racing. 
 
Yapp 
Yapp is a type of bookbinding of limp leather with overlapping edges. It 
was first made for Yapp, a London bookseller in 1860, hence the name.  
 
Yard 
The yard is a unit of the imperial scale of measurement of length 
equivalent to 3 FEET, 36 inches or 0.9144 metres. 
 
Yards 
see "Yard" 
 
Yarn 
Yarn is a fibre, such as cotton, wool, silk or flax which has been spun 
and prepared for use in weaving or knitting.  
 
Yawl 
A yawl is a two-masted sailing ship. The aftermast is much smaller than 
the mainmast and is placed far aft. 
 
Yeanling 
Yeanling is an old term for a young lamb or kid.  
 
Yearling 
A yearling is a one-year old animal. The term is generally applied to 
sheep, calves and foals.  
 
Yolk 
Yolk is a food store found in eggs. 
 
Ytterbium 
Ytterbium is a metal element. 
 
Yttrium 
Yttrium is a metal element. 
 
Zinc 
Zinc is a metal element.  
 
Zirconium 
Zirconium is a lustrous, grayish-white, strong, ductile, metallic 
element, symbol Zr, atomic number 40, atomic weight 91.22. It occurs in 
nature as the mineral zircon (zirconium silicate), from which it is 
obtained commercially. It is used in some ceramics, alloys for wire and 
filaments, steel manufacture, and nuclear reactors, where its low neutron 
absorption is advantageous.   
 
Zither 
The zither is an Austrian musical instrument. 
 
Zodiac 
The zodiac is the name given by the Greeks to the heavens.  
 
Zwitterion 
Zwitterion is an ion that has both a positive and a negative charge, such 
as an amino acid in neutral solution. 
  
  
ABBREVIATIONS  
  
 
2D 
2D is an abbreviation for 2-Dimensional 
 
3D 
3D is an abbreviation for 3-Dimensional 
 
3M 
3M is an abbreviation for Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing 
 
4GL 
4GL is an abbreviation for Fourth Generation Language 
 
4H 
4H is an abbreviation for Head, Heart, Hands, Health 
 
4WD 
4WD is an abbreviation for Four wheel Drive (see also FWD) 
 
A 
A is an abbreviation for Aftermath 
 
A&A 
A&A is an abbreviation for Astronomy and Astrophysics [Space] 
 
A&M 
A&M is an abbreviation for Agricultural and Mechanical 
 
A/D 
A/D is an abbreviation for Analog to Digital converter (see ADC) 
 
A/P 
A/P is an abbreviation for Accounts Payable 
 
A/R 
A/R is an abbreviation for Accounts Receivable 
 
AA 
AA is an abbreviation for Affirmative Action committee 
Alcoholics Anonymous 
Antiaircraft Artillery 
Associate in Accounting 
Automobile Association [England] 
 
AAA 
AAA is an abbreviation for American Automobile Association 
 
AAAL 
AAAL is an abbreviation for American Academy of Arts and Letters 
 
AAAS 
AAAS is an abbreviation for American Association for the Advancement of 
Science 
 
AAII 
AAII is an abbreviation for American Association of Individual Investors 
 
AAMSI 
AAMSI is an abbreviation for American Association for Medical Systems 
Informatics 
 
AAO 
AAO is an abbreviation for Anglo-Australian Observatory [Space] 
 
AAP 
AAP is an abbreviation for Affirmative Action Program 
 
AAR 
AAR is an abbreviation for Automatic Alternate Routing  
 
AARC 
AARC is an abbreviation for Anglo-American Cataloging Rules 
 
AARN 
AARN is an abbreviation for Australian Academic Research Network 
[Networking] 
 
AARP 
AARP is an abbreviation for American Association of Retired Persons 
 
AAS 
AAS is an abbreviation for American Astronomical Society [Space] 
 
AAVSO 
AAVSO is an abbreviation for American Association of Variable Star 
Observers [Space] 
 
AB 
AB is an abbreviation for ABle seaman 
 
ABA 
ABA is an abbreviation for American Bar Association 
American Basketball Association 
American Booksellers Association 
 
ABBR 
ABBR is an abbreviation for ABBReviation 
 
ABC 
ABC is an abbreviation for American Broadcasting Company [Corporate name] 
 
AC 
AC is an abbreviation for Alternating Current (ac, see also DC) 
Ante Christum (before Christ) 
Ante Cibum (before meals) 
 
ACAA 
ACAA is an abbreviation for Agricultural Conservation and Adjustment 
Administration 
 
ACAWS 
ACAWS is an abbreviation for Advisory, Caution, And Warning System 
 
ACBL 
ACBL is an abbreviation for American Contract Bridge League 
 
ACC 
ACC is an abbreviation for Argonne Code Center 
 
ACCS 
ACCS is an abbreviation for Army Command and Control System 
 
ACD 
ACD is an abbreviation for Automatic Call Distributor [Telephony] 
 
ACE 
ACE is an abbreviation for Advanced Composition Explorer [Space] 
Advanced Computing Environments [Corporate name] 
Automatic Calibration and Equalization 
 
ACF 
ACF is an abbreviation for Advanced Communications Function 
 
ACHEFT 
ACHEFT is an abbreviation for Automated Clearing House Electronic Funds 
Transfer 
 
ACK 
ACK is an abbreviation for ACKnowledge 
 
ACL 
ACL is an abbreviation for Advanced Cmos Logic 
 
ACLU 
ACLU is an abbreviation for American Civil Liberties Union 
 
ACM 
ACM is an abbreviation for Association for Computing Machinery 
 
ACRV 
ACRV is an abbreviation for Assured Crew Return Vehicle (or) Astronaut 
Crew Rescue Vehicle [Space] 
 
ACS 
ACS is an abbreviation for Advanced Communications System 
 
ACSE 
ACSE is an abbreviation for Association Control Service Entity (ISO/CCITT 
layer 7) 
 
ACT 
ACT is an abbreviation for Action for Children's Television (in 
Cambridge, MA) 
American Conservatory Theater 
 
ACTS 
ACTS is an abbreviation for Advanced Communications Technology Satellite 
Automatic Coin Telephone Service [Telephony] 
 
ACU 
ACU is an abbreviation for Alarm Control Unit 
Automatic Call Unit [Telephony] 
 
ACW 
ACW is an abbreviation for Alternating Continuous Waves 
 
AD 
AD is an abbreviation for After Date 
Anno Domini (in the year of our Lord) 
Application Development 
 
Ad Astra 
Ad Astra is an abbreviation for To the stars [Latin, Space] 
 
AD&D 
AD&D is an abbreviation for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 
 
ADAP 
ADAP is an abbreviation for Alzheimer's disease-associated protein 
American Discount Auto Parts [Corporate name] 
 
ADB 
ADB is an abbreviation for A DeBugger 
Apple Desktop Bus 
 
ADC 
ADC is an abbreviation for Analog to Digital Converter 
 
ADCI 
ADCI is an abbreviation for Automatic Display Call Indicator 
 
ADF 
ADF is an abbreviation for Automatic Direction Finder 
 
ADM 
ADM is an abbreviation for ADMiral 
 
ADP 
ADP is an abbreviation for Adenosine Di-Phosphate 
Administrative Data Processing 
Advanced Data Processing 
 
ADPCM 
ADPCM is an abbreviation for Pulse Code Modulation with Adaptive 
Quantization 
 
ADS 
ADS is an abbreviation for Application Development System 
 
ADSR 
ADSR is an abbreviation for Attack Decay Sustain Release 
 
ADT 
ADT is an abbreviation for Abstract Data Type 
Atlantic Daylight Time 
 
AE 
AE is an abbreviation for Application Execution 
 
AEA 
AEA is an abbreviation for American Electronics Association 
 
AEC 
AEC is an abbreviation for Atomic Energy Commission 
 
AEF 
AEF is an abbreviation for American Expeditionary Force (see BEF) 
 
AEGIS 
AEGIS is an abbreviation for Advanced Electronic Guidance and 
Instrumentation System 
 
AF 
AF is an abbreviation for Adventures in Fantasy 
Air Force 
Audio Frequency 
 
AFADS 
AFADS is an abbreviation for Automatic Force Adjustment Data System 
 
AFATDS 
AFATDS is an abbreviation for Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data 
System 
 
AFB 
AFB is an abbreviation for Air Force Base 
 
AFC 
AFC is an abbreviation for American Football Conference 
Automatic Flight Control 
Automatic Frequency Control 
 
AFCAC 
AFCAC is an abbreviation for Air Force Computer Acquisition Center 
 
AFCC 
AFCC is an abbreviation for Air Force Communications Command 
 
AFGE 
AFGE is an abbreviation for American Federation of Government Employees 
 
AFIPS 
AFIPS is an abbreviation for American Federation of Information 
Processing Societies 
 
AFL 
AFL is an abbreviation for American Federation of Labor 
American Football League 
 
AFLCIO 
AFLCIO is an abbreviation for American Federation of Labor and Congress 
of Industrial Organizations 
 
AFNOR 
AFNOR is an abbreviation for Association Francaise de NORmalization 
 
AFP 
AFP is an abbreviation for Appletalk Filing Protocol 
 
AFS 
AFS is an abbreviation for Andrew File System 
 
AFSC 
AFSC is an abbreviation for Air Force Systems Command 
 
AFSCME 
AFSCME is an abbreviation for American Federation of State, County and 
Municipal Employees 
 
AFTRA 
AFTRA is an abbreviation for American Federation of Television and Radio 
Artists 
 
AFV 
AFV is an abbreviation for Armoured Fighting Vehicle 
 
AG 
AG is an abbreviation for Adjutant General 
Arcade Game 
Attorney General 
 
AGCT 
AGCT is an abbreviation for Army General Classification Test 
 
AGN 
AGN is an abbreviation for Active Galactic Nucleus [Space] 
 
AHL 
AHL is an abbreviation for American Hockey League 
 
AHQ 
AHQ is an abbreviation for Air HeadQuarters 
 
AI 
AI is an abbreviation for Artificial Intelligence 
 
AIAA 
AIAA is an abbreviation for American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics [Space] 
 
AIC 
AIC is an abbreviation for Automatic Intercept Center 
 
AID 
AID is an abbreviation for Agency for International Development 
 
AIDDE 
AIDDE is an abbreviation for Ames' Interactive Dynamic Display Editor 
 
AIDS 
AIDS is an abbreviation for Acquired ImmunoDeficiency Syndrome 
 
AIOD 
AIOD is an abbreviation for Automatic Identification Outward Dialing 
 
AIS 
AIS is an abbreviation for Automatic Intercept System 
 
AIX 
AIX is an abbreviation for Advanced Interactive eXecutive (IBM's name for 
UNIX) 
 
AJ 
AJ is an abbreviation for Astronomical Journal [Space] 
 
AK 
AK is an abbreviation for Alaska 
 
AKA 
AKA is an abbreviation for Also Known As 
 
AL 
AL is an abbreviation for Alabama [US state postal designation] 
American League (baseball) 
 
ALA 
ALA is an abbreviation for American Library Association 
Automobile Legal Association 
 
ALB 
ALB is an abbreviation for Analog LoopBack 
 
ALBM 
ALBM is an abbreviation for Air-to-Land Ballistic Missile 
 
ALC 
ALC is an abbreviation for Automatic Load Control 
 
ALGOL 
ALGOL is an abbreviation for ALGOrithmic Language 
 
ALIT 
ALIT is an abbreviation for Automatic Line Insulation Testing [Telephony] 
 
ALPO 
ALPO is an abbreviation for Association of Lunar and Planetary Observers 
[Space] 
 
ALS 
ALS is an abbreviation for Advanced Launch System [Space] 
 
ALU 
ALU is an abbreviation for Arithmetic Logic Unit 
 
AM 
AM is an abbreviation for Amplitude Modulation 
Ante Meridiem (before noon) 
 
AMA 
AMA is an abbreviation for American Medical Association 
Automatic Message Accounting [Telephony] 
 
AMARC 
AMARC is an abbreviation for Automatic Message Accounting Recording 
Center 
 
AMBA 
AMBA is an abbreviation for Association of Master of Business 
Administration 
 
AMC 
AMC is an abbreviation for Albany Medical College 
American Motors Corporation(?) [Corporate name] 
Appalachian Mountain Club 
 
AMD 
AMD is an abbreviation for Advanced Micro Devices [Corporate name] 
 
AMEX 
AMEX is an abbreviation for AMerican EXpress [Corporate name] 
 
AMI 
AMI is an abbreviation for Alternate Mark Inversion (see also NRZ, NRZI, 
B8ZS) 
 
AMORC 
AMORC is an abbreviation for Ancient Mystic Order Rosae Crucis 
 
AMP 
AMP is an abbreviation for Adenosine MonoPhosphate 
 
AMPAS 
AMPAS is an abbreviation for Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
Acedemy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
 
AMRAAM 
AMRAAM is an abbreviation for Advanced Medium Range Air-To-Air Missile 
 
AMROC 
AMROC is an abbreviation for American Rocket Company [Space] 
 
AMSAT 
AMSAT is an abbreviation for radio AMateur SATellite corp. 
 
AMU 
AMU is an abbreviation for Atomic Mass Unit 
 
AMVET 
AMVET is an abbreviation for AMerican VETeran 
 
ANA 
ANA is an abbreviation for American Nurses Association 
 
ANAC 
ANAC is an abbreviation for Automatic Number Announcemnt Circuit 
[Telephony] 
 
ANC 
ANC is an abbreviation for All Number Calling [Telephony] 
Army Nurse Corps 
 
ANDF 
ANDF is an abbreviation for Architecture-Neural Distribution Format 
 
ANF 
ANF is an abbreviation for Automatic Number Forwarding [Telephony] 
 
ANG 
ANG is an abbreviation for Air National Guard 
 
ANI 
ANI is an abbreviation for Automatic Number Identification (see also: 
CLID) [Telephony] 
 
ANL 
ANL is an abbreviation for Argonne National Laboratory 
 
ANOVA 
ANOVA is an abbreviation for ANalysis Of VAriance 
 
ANPA 
ANPA is an abbreviation for American Newspaper Publishers Association 
 
ANSI 
ANSI is an abbreviation for American National Standards Institute 
 
ANZUS 
ANZUS is an abbreviation for Australia, New Zealand, United States 
 
AO 
AO is an abbreviation for Account Of 
 
AOA 
AOA is an abbreviation for Abort Once Around (Shuttle abort plan) [Space] 
Abort Once Around [NASA, Shuttle] 
 
AOL 
AOL is an abbreviation for Absent Over Leave (see AWOL) 
 
AOS 
AOS is an abbreviation for Academic Operating System 
Alternate Operator Service [Telephony] 
 
AP 
AP is an abbreviation for Additional Premium 
All Points 
Associated Press [Corporate name] 
 
Ap.J 
Ap.J is an abbreviation for Astrophysical Journal [Space] 
 
APA 
APA is an abbreviation for All Points Addressable 
American Psychological Association 
 
APB 
APB is an abbreviation for All Points Bulletin 
 
APDA 
APDA is an abbreviation for Apple Programmers and Developers Association 
 
API 
API is an abbreviation for Application Programming Interface 
 
APICS 
APICS is an abbreviation for American Production and Inventory Control 
Society 
 
APL 
APL is an abbreviation for A Programming Language 
acute promyelocytic leukemia [Disease] 
 
APO 
APO is an abbreviation for Alpha Phi Omega, service fraternity 
Army Post Office 
 
APP 
APP is an abbreviation for Applications Portability Profile 
 
APPC 
APPC is an abbreviation for Advanced Peer-to-Peer Communications 
 
APR 
APR is an abbreviation for Annual Percentage Rate (as in loan interest) 
 
APSE 
APSE is an abbreviation for Ada Programming Support Environment 
 
APU 
APU is an abbreviation for Auxiliary Power Unit [Space] 
 
AQ 
AQ is an abbreviation for Accumulator-Quotient register 
 
AR 
AR is an abbreviation for Address Register 
Arkansas 
 
ARC 
ARC is an abbreviation for AIDS-related complex 
American Red Cross 
Ames Research Center (NASA) [Space] 
 
ARCNET 
ARCNET is an abbreviation for Attached Resource Computer local area 
NETwork 
 
ARO 
ARO is an abbreviation for After Receipt of Order 
 
ARP 
ARP is an abbreviation for Address Resolution Protocol 
 
ARPA 
ARPA is an abbreviation for Advanced Research Projects Agency (of the 
DoD, see DARPA) 
 
ARPANET 
ARPANET is an abbreviation for ARPA (q.v.) NETwork 
 
ARRL 
ARRL is an abbreviation for Amateur Radio Relay League 
 
ARV 
ARV is an abbreviation for American Revised Version 
 
AS 
AS is an abbreviation for Anglo-Saxon 
 
ASA 
ASA is an abbreviation for Acetyl Salicylic Acid 
 
ASAP 
ASAP is an abbreviation for As Soon As Possible 
 
ASC 
ASC is an abbreviation for Accredited Standards Committee 
 
ASCAP 
ASCAP is an abbreviation for American Society of Composers, Authors, and 
Publishers 
 
ASCC 
ASCC is an abbreviation for Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator 
 
ASCII 
ASCII is an abbreviation for American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange 
 
ASDIC 
ASDIC is an abbreviation for Anti-Submarine Detection Investigation 
Committee (British for sonar) 
 
ASDSP 
ASDSP is an abbreviation for Application-Specific Digital Signal 
Processor 
 
ASG 
ASG is an abbreviation for Automated Sciences Group 
 
ASHRAE 
ASHRAE is an abbreviation for Amer. Soc. of Heating, Refrigerating and 
Air-cond. Engineers, inc. 
 
ASIC 
ASIC is an abbreviation for Application Specific Integrated Circuit 
 
ASME 
ASME is an abbreviation for American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
 
ASN 
ASN is an abbreviation for Abstract Syntax Notation One (ISO/CCITT ASN.1) 
 
ASP 
ASP is an abbreviation for Aggregated Switch Procurement 
 
ASRM 
ASRM is an abbreviation for Advanced Solid Rocket Motor [Space] 
 
ASSR 
ASSR is an abbreviation for Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic 
 
AST 
AST is an abbreviation for Atlantic Standard Time 
 
ASV 
ASV is an abbreviation for American Standard Version 
 
AT 
AT is an abbreviation for Atlantic Time 
 
AT&T 
AT&T is an abbreviation for American Telephone & Telegraph [Corporate 
name] 
 
ATA 
ATA is an abbreviation for Automatic Trouble Analysis 
 
ATACC 
ATACC is an abbreviation for Advanced Tactical Air Command Central 
 
ATB 
ATB is an abbreviation for Advanced Technology Bomber (stealth bomber) 
 
ATC 
ATC is an abbreviation for Air Traffic Control 
 
ATDRS 
ATDRS is an abbreviation for Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite 
[Space] 
 
ATF 
ATF is an abbreviation for Advanced Technology Fighter 
 
ATIS 
ATIS is an abbreviation for Atherton Tools Interface Specification 
 
ATLAS 
ATLAS is an abbreviation for Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and 
Science [Space] 
 
ATM 
ATM is an abbreviation for Amateur Telescope Maker [Space] 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
Automatic Teller Machine 
 
ATO 
ATO is an abbreviation for Abort To Orbit (Shuttle abort plan) [Space] 
Abort To Orbit [NASA, Shuttle] 
 
ATOMS 
ATOMS is an abbreviation for AT&t Optimized Materials Simulator 
 
ATP 
ATP is an abbreviation for Adenosine TriPhosphate 
 
ATPCO 
ATPCO is an abbreviation for Airline Tariff Publishing COmpany 
 
ATT 
ATT is an abbreviation for American Telephone & Telegraph (normally 
written AT&T when seperate) 
 
ATTIS 
ATTIS is an abbreviation for American Telephone and Telegraph Information 
Systems [AT&T] (Division) 
 
ATV 
ATV is an abbreviation for All Terrain Vehicle 
 
AU 
AU is an abbreviation for Astronomical Unit (93,000,000 miles) [Space] 
Astronomical Unit [Space] 
 
AUI 
AUI is an abbreviation for Attachment Universal Interface 
 
AURA 
AURA is an abbreviation for Association of Universities for Research in 
Astronomy [Space] 
 
AUS 
AUS is an abbreviation for Army of the United States 
 
AUTODIN 
AUTODIN is an abbreviation for AUTOmatic DIgital Network 
 
AUTOVON 
AUTOVON is an abbreviation for AUTOmatic VOice Network 
 
AV 
AV is an abbreviation for AudioVisual 
 
AVD 
AVD is an abbreviation for Alternate Voice Data 
 
AVLIS 
AVLIS is an abbreviation for Atomic Vapor Laser Isotope Separation 
 
AW&ST 
AW&ST is an abbreviation for Aviation Week and Space Technology (a.k.a. 
AvLeak) [Space] 
 
AWACS 
AWACS is an abbreviation for Airborne Warnings And Control Systems 
 
AWEA 
AWEA is an abbreviation for American Wind Energy Association 
 
AWG 
AWG is an abbreviation for American Wire Gauge 
 
AWK 
AWK is an abbreviation for al Aho, peter Weinberger, brian Kernighan 
(pattern scanning language) 
 
AWOL 
AWOL is an abbreviation for Absent WithOut Leave (also Absent Without 
Official Leave) (see AOL) 
 
AXAF 
AXAF is an abbreviation for Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility [Space] 
 
AZ 
AZ is an abbreviation for Arizona 
 
B 
B is an abbreviation for Book 
 
B8ZS 
B8ZS is an abbreviation for Binary 8 Zero Substitution (see also NRZ, 
NRZI, AMI) 
 
BA 
BA is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Arts 
 
BACH 
BACH is an abbreviation for Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp 
 
BAFO 
BAFO is an abbreviation for Best And Final Offer 
 
BARRNet 
BARRNet is an abbreviation for Bay Area Regional Research Network (SF Bay 
Area) 
 
BASIC 
BASIC is an abbreviation for Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction 
Code 
 
BATSE 
BATSE is an abbreviation for Burst And Transient Source Experiment (on 
GRO) [Space] 
 
BB 
BB is an abbreviation for Bases on Balls 
Best of Breed 
Bunnies and Burrows 
 
BBA 
BBA is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Business Administration 
 
BBB 
BBB is an abbreviation for Better Business Bureau 
 
BBC 
BBC is an abbreviation for British Broadcasting Corporation 
 
BBL 
BBL is an abbreviation for Barrel 
 
BBN 
BBN is an abbreviation for Bolt, Beranek, and Newman, Inc. [Corporate 
name] 
 
BBXRT 
BBXRT is an abbreviation for Broad-Band X-Ray Telescope (ASTRO package) 
[Space] 
 
BC 
BC is an abbreviation for Battlecars 
Before Christ 
British Columbia 
 
BC/BS 
BC/BS is an abbreviation for Blue Cross/Blue Shield 
 
BCD 
BCD is an abbreviation for Bad Conduct Discharge 
Binary Coded Decimal 
 
BCDIC 
BCDIC is an abbreviation for Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code 
 
BCE 
BCE is an abbreviation for Before the Common Era (substitute for BC) 
 
BCNU 
BCNU is an abbreviation for Be Seeing You [Net jargon] 
 
BCP 
BCP is an abbreviation for Byte Controlled Protocols 
 
BCPL 
BCPL is an abbreviation for Basic Combined Programming Language 
 
BCS 
BCS is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Commercial Science 
Binary Compatibility Standard 
Boston Computer Society 
British Computer Society 
 
BD 
BD is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Divinity 
Bank Draft 
Bills Discounted 
 
BD&D 
BD&D is an abbreviation for Basic Dungeons & Dragons 
 
BDF 
BDF is an abbreviation for Binary Distribution Format 
 
BDT 
BDT is an abbreviation for Billing Data Transmitter 
 
BE 
BE is an abbreviation for Bill of Exchange 
 
BEF 
BEF is an abbreviation for British Expeditionary Force (see AEF) 
 
BELCORE 
BELCORE is an abbreviation for BELL COmmunications REsearch 
 
BEM 
BEM is an abbreviation for Bug Eyed Monster 
Bug-Eyed Monster [Space] 
 
BENELUX 
BENELUX is an abbreviation for BElgium, NEtherlands, and LUXembourg 
 
BER 
BER is an abbreviation for Bit Error Rate 
 
BERT 
BERT is an abbreviation for Bit Error Rate Test 
 
BEST 
BEST is an abbreviation for Borland Enhanced Support and Training 
 
BF 
BF is an abbreviation for Brought Forward 
 
BFA 
BFA is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Fine Arts 
 
BFD 
BFD is an abbreviation for Bristol (RI) Fire Department (probably typical 
of any town starting "B") 
 
BH 
BH is an abbreviation for Black Hole [Space] 
Boot Hill 
 
BHP 
BHP is an abbreviation for Brake HorsePower 
 
BICS 
BICS is an abbreviation for Building Industry Consulting Services 
[Telephony] 
 
BID 
BID is an abbreviation for Bis In Die (twice a day) 
 
BIMA 
BIMA is an abbreviation for Berkeley Illinois Maryland Array [Space] 
 
BIOS 
BIOS is an abbreviation for Basic Input Output System 
 
BIS 
BIS is an abbreviation for Business Information System 
 
BISDN 
BISDN is an abbreviation for Broadband ISDN (q.v.) [Telephony] 
 
BiSync 
BiSync is an abbreviation for Binary Synchronous Communications (BSC is 
preferred) [IBM] 
 
Bit 
Bit is an abbreviation for BInary digiT 
 
BITNET 
BITNET is an abbreviation for Because It's Time Network 
 
BLAST 
BLAST is an abbreviation for BLocked ASynchronous Transmission 
 
BLERT 
BLERT is an abbreviation for BLock Error Rate Test 
 
BLF 
BLF is an abbreviation for Busy Lamp Field [Telephony] 
 
BLT 
BLT is an abbreviation for BLock Transfer [Instruction] 
Bacon, Lettuce, and Tomato (sandwich) 
Branch Less Than [Instruction] 
 
BM 
BM is an abbreviation for Basal Metabolism 
Bowel Movement 
 
BMA 
BMA is an abbreviation for Bank Marketing Association 
 
BMEWS 
BMEWS is an abbreviation for Ballistic Missile Early Warning 
 
BMO 
BMO is an abbreviation for Ballistic Missile Office 
 
BMOC 
BMOC is an abbreviation for Big Man On Campus 
 
BMR 
BMR is an abbreviation for Basal Metabolism Rate 
 
BNC 
BNC is an abbreviation for Bayonet Neill Concelman (connector) 
[Electronics] (see also TNC) 
 
BNF 
BNF is an abbreviation for Bachus-Naur Form 
 
BO 
BO is an abbreviation for Body Odor 
Branch Office 
Buyer's Option 
 
BOC 
BOC is an abbreviation for Bell Operating Company 
 
BOD 
BOD is an abbreviation for Board Of Directors 
 
BOF 
BOF is an abbreviation for Birds Of a Feather 
 
BOM 
BOM is an abbreviation for Bill Of Materials 
 
BOOTP 
BOOTP is an abbreviation for Bootstrap Protocol [Internet] 
 
BOQ 
BOQ is an abbreviation for Bachelor Officers' Quarters 
 
BOS 
BOS is an abbreviation for Business Office Supervisor 
 
BOSIX 
BOSIX is an abbreviation for Biin Open System Interface eXtension 
 
BP 
BP is an abbreviation for Blood Pressure 
British Petroleum 
British Pharmacopoeia 
 
BPI 
BPI is an abbreviation for Bits Per Inch 
 
BPL 
BPL is an abbreviation for Boston Public Library 
Branch if PLus [Instruction] 
 
BPOE 
BPOE is an abbreviation for Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks 
 
BPS 
BPS is an abbreviation for Bits Per Second 
 
BR 
BR is an abbreviation for Bills Receivable 
British Rail 
 
BRA 
BRA is an abbreviation for Boston Redevelopment Authority 
 
BRI 
BRI is an abbreviation for Basic Rate Interface (ISDN) [Telephony] 
 
BRIEF 
BRIEF is an abbreviation for Basic Reconfigurable Interactive Editing 
Facility 
 
BRL 
BRL is an abbreviation for army Ballistic Research Laboratory 
 
BRS 
BRS is an abbreviation for Bibliographic Retrieval Service 
 
BS 
BS is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Science 
Bill of Sale 
 
BSA 
BSA is an abbreviation for Birmingham Small Arms 
Boy Scouts of America 
 
BSC 
BSC is an abbreviation for Binary Synchronous Communications (also 
sometimes BiSync) [IBM] 
 
BSc 
BSc is an abbreviation for Bachelor of SCience 
 
BSD 
BSD is an abbreviation for Berkeley Software Distribution 
 
BSN 
BSN is an abbreviation for Bachelor of Science in Nursing 
 
BSS 
BSS is an abbreviation for Block Started by Symbol 
 
BSTJ 
BSTJ is an abbreviation for Bell System Technical Journal 
 
BT 
BT is an abbreviation for British Telecom 
 
BTAM 
BTAM is an abbreviation for Basic Telecommunications Access Method [IBM] 
 
BThU 
BThU is an abbreviation for British Thermal Unit (BTU {q.v.} is 
preferred) 
 
BTL 
BTL is an abbreviation for Bell Telephone Laboratories 
 
BTO 
BTO is an abbreviation for Bachman Turner Overdrive 
 
BTU 
BTU is an abbreviation for British Thermal Unit 
 
BTW 
BTW is an abbreviation for By The Way [Net jargon] 
 
BU 
BU is an abbreviation for Boston University 
 
BUF 
BUF is an abbreviation for B-52 bomber ("Big Ugly Fellow") [USAF] 
 
BV 
BV is an abbreviation for Blessed Virgin 
 
BWI 
BWI is an abbreviation for Baltimore-Washington International (airport) 
British West Indies 
 
BX 
BX is an abbreviation for Base eXchange (see also PX) 
 
C 
C is an abbreviation for programming language (successor to B, which was 
based on BCPL) 
 
C 
C is an abbreviation for centi- (metric 1/100) 
 
C&S 
C&S is an abbreviation for Chivalry & Sorcery 
 
C&T 
C&T is an abbreviation for Communications & Tracking [Space] 
 
C/O 
C/O is an abbreviation for in Care Of 
 
CA 
CA is an abbreviation for California 
Chartered Accountant 
Chief Accountant 
Chronological Age 
Collision Avoidance (as in CSMA/CA (q.v.)) 
 
CAB 
CAB is an abbreviation for Civil Aeronautics Board 
 
CACM 
CACM is an abbreviation for Communications of the Association for 
Computing Machinery 
 
CAD 
CAD is an abbreviation for Computer Aided Design (sometimes seen as 
CAD/CAM) 
Computer Aided Dispatching 
 
CAE 
CAE is an abbreviation for Common Applications Environment 
Computer Aided Engineering 
 
CAI 
CAI is an abbreviation for Computer Aided Instruction 
 
CAIS 
CAIS is an abbreviation for Common Apse Interface Specification 
 
CALS 
CALS is an abbreviation for Computer-aided Acquisition and Logistics 
Support 
 
CAM 
CAM is an abbreviation for Computer Aided Management 
Computer Aided Manufacturing (sometimes seen as CAD/CAM) 
Content Addressable Memory 
 
CAMA 
CAMA is an abbreviation for Centralized Automatic Message Accounting 
[Telephony] 
 
CAMP 
CAMP is an abbreviation for Campaign Against Marijuana Planting 
 
CAP 
CAP is an abbreviation for Civil Air Patrol 
Columbia Appletalk Package 
 
CAR 
CAR is an abbreviation for Contents of the Address part of the Register 
(LISP) 
 
CARE 
CARE is an abbreviation for Committee on American Relief in Europe 
 
CARP 
CARP is an abbreviation for California Air Resources Board 
 
CASE 
CASE is an abbreviation for Computer Aided Software Engineering 
 
CASSIS 
CASSIS is an abbreviation for Classification and Search Support 
Information System 
 
CAT 
CAT is an abbreviation for Computer-Aided Tomography 
 
CATIS 
CATIS is an abbreviation for Common Applications and Tools Integration 
Services 
 
CATV 
CATV is an abbreviation for Common Antenna TeleVision 
Community Antenna TeleVision 
 
CAVU 
CAVU is an abbreviation for Ceiling And Visibility Unlimited 
 
CB 
CB is an abbreviation for Citizens Band radio 
 
CBC 
CBC is an abbreviation for Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
 
CBD 
CBD is an abbreviation for Cash Before Delivery 
Commerce Business Daily 
 
CBEMA 
CBEMA is an abbreviation for Computer & Business Equipment Manufacturers 
Association 
 
CBR 
CBR is an abbreviation for Chemical, Biological, Radiological warfare 
 
CBS 
CBS is an abbreviation for Columbia Broadcasting System [Corporate name] 
 
CBW 
CBW is an abbreviation for Chemical and Biological Warfare 
 
CC 
CC is an abbreviation for C (language) Compiler 
Carbon Copy 
 
CCA 
CCA is an abbreviation for Computer Corporation of America [Corporate 
name] 
 
CCAFS 
CCAFS is an abbreviation for Cape Canaveral Air Force Station [Space] 
 
CCC 
CCC is an abbreviation for Canadian Committee on Cataloging 
Civil(ian) Conservation Corps 
Command, Control, and Communications (sometimes C^3) 
Concourse Computer Center [MIT] 
 
CCCCM 
CCCCM is an abbreviation for CCC CounterMeasures (sometimes C^3CM) 
 
CCCI 
CCCI is an abbreviation for Command, Control, Communications, and 
Intelligence 
 
CCD 
CCD is an abbreviation for Charge Coupled Device (see CID) 
Charge-Coupled Device [Space] 
 
CCDS 
CCDS is an abbreviation for Centers for the Commercial Development of 
Space [Space] 
 
CCF 
CCF is an abbreviation for Hundred Cubic Feet 
 
CCI 
CCI is an abbreviation for Computer Carrier Interrupt 
Computer Consoles, Incorporated 
 
CCIP 
CCIP is an abbreviation for Continuously Computed Impact Point 
 
CCIRN 
CCIRN is an abbreviation for Coordinating Committee for Intercontinental 
Research Networking 
 
CCIS 
CCIS is an abbreviation for Common Channel Interoffice Signaling 
[Telephony] 
 
CCITT 
CCITT is an abbreviation for Comite' Consultatif International 
Telegraphique et Telephonique 
Consultative Committee on International Telephony and Telegraphy 
International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee 
 
CCR 
CCR is an abbreviation for Commitment, Concurrency, and Recovery 
Creedence Clearwater Revival [Music] 
 
CCRI 
CCRI is an abbreviation for Community College of Rhode Island [Corporate 
name] 
 
CCRP 
CCRP is an abbreviation for Continuously Computed Release Point 
 
CCS 
CCS is an abbreviation for Hundred Call Seconds [Telephony] 
 
CCS7 
CCS7 is an abbreviation for Common Channel Signalling (version #7) 
[Telephony, AT&T] 
 
CCSA 
CCSA is an abbreviation for Common Control Switching Arrangement 
[Telephony] 
 
CCTA 
CCTA is an abbreviation for Central Computer and Telecommunications 
Agency 
 
CCTV 
CCTV is an abbreviation for Closed Circuit TeleVision 
 
CD 
CD is an abbreviation for Carrier Detect (properly DCD (q.v.)) (EIA RS-
232-C) 
Certificate of Deposit 
Civil Defense 
Collision Detection (as in CSMA/CD (q.v.)) 
Compact Disk 
 
CD-ROM 
CD-ROM is an abbreviation for Compact Disk Read Only Memory 
Compact Disk Read-Only Memory [Space] 
 
CDA 
CDA is an abbreviation for Call Data Accumulator 
Compound Documents Architecture 
 
CDC 
CDC is an abbreviation for Centers for Disease Control 
Control Data Corporation, Inc. [Corporate name] 
 
CDEV 
CDEV is an abbreviation for Control panel DEVice 
 
CDIAC 
CDIAC is an abbreviation for Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center 
 
CDO 
CDO is an abbreviation for Community Dial Office 
 
CDR 
CDR is an abbreviation for CommanDeR 
Contents of the Decrement part of the Register (LISP) 
 
CDSF 
CDSF is an abbreviation for Commercially Developed Space Facility 
 
CDT 
CDT is an abbreviation for Central Daylight Time 
 
CDU 
CDU is an abbreviation for Control Display Unit 
 
CE 
CE is an abbreviation for Chemical Engineer 
Civil Engineer 
Common Era (substitute for AD) 
Corps of Engineers 
Customer Engineer (see also FE, SE) 
 
CEA 
CEA is an abbreviation for Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique (Frenc 
Atomic Energy Commision) 
Council of Economic Advisors 
County Education Authority 
 
CEC 
CEC is an abbreviation for Commission of the European Communities 
 
CED 
CED is an abbreviation for Committee for Economic Development 
 
CELSS 
CELSS is an abbreviation for Controlled Ecological Life Support System 
[Space] 
 
CENS 
CENS is an abbreviation for Centre d'Etudes Nucleaires de Seclay 
 
CENTO 
CENTO is an abbreviation for CENtral Treaty Organization 
 
CEO 
CEO is an abbreviation for Chief Executive Officer 
 
CERFnet 
CERFnet is an abbreviation for California Education and Research 
Federation Network 
 
CERN 
CERN is an abbreviation for European Organization for Nuclear Research 
organisation (formerly Conseil) Europeenne pour la Recherche Nucleaires 
 
CERT 
CERT is an abbreviation for Computer Emergency Response Team 
 
CEVI 
CEVI is an abbreviation for Common Equipment Voltage Indicator 
 
CF 
CF is an abbreviation for Carry Forward 
Coin First (payphone) [Telephony] 
Cystic Fibrosis [Disease] 
 
CFA 
CFA is an abbreviation for Center For Astrophysics [Space] 
 
CFC 
CFC is an abbreviation for Chloro-FluoroCarbon [Chemical] 
Combined Federal Campaign 
 
CFD 
CFD is an abbreviation for Computational Fluid Dynamics 
 
CFHT 
CFHT is an abbreviation for Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope [Space] 
 
CFI 
CFI is an abbreviation for Cost, Freight, and Insurance 
 
CFL 
CFL is an abbreviation for Canadian Football League 
 
CFO 
CFO is an abbreviation for Chief Financial Officer 
 
CG 
CG is an abbreviation for Coast Guard 
Commanding General 
 
CG&E 
CG&E is an abbreviation for Cincinnati Gas & Electric 
 
CGA 
CGA is an abbreviation for Color Graphics Adapter 
 
CGCT 
CGCT is an abbreviation for Compagnie Generale de Constructions 
Telephoniques 
 
CGE 
CGE is an abbreviation for Compagnie Generale d'Electricite 
 
CH 
CH is an abbreviation for Cardboard Heroes 
ClearingHouse 
CourtHouse 
Customs House 
 
CHA 
CHA is an abbreviation for Champions 
 
CHAP 
CHAP is an abbreviation for CHAnnel Processor 
 
CHARA 
CHARA is an abbreviation for Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy 
[Space] 
 
CHI 
CHI is an abbreviation for Chill:	Adventures into the Unknown 
 
CHOTS 
CHOTS is an abbreviation for Corporate Headquarters Office Technology 
System 
 
CHP 
CHP is an abbreviation for California Highway Patrol 
 
CI 
CI is an abbreviation for Cubic Inches 
 
CIA 
CIA is an abbreviation for Central Intelligence Agency [US Government] 
Culinary Institute of America (Hyde Park, NY) 
 
CIC 
CIC is an abbreviation for Carrier Identification Codes [Telephony] 
(10XXX codes) 
Committee on Institutional Cooperation 
Coordination and Information Center [CSNet] 
 
CICA 
CICA is an abbreviation for Competition in Contracting Act 
 
CICS 
CICS is an abbreviation for Customer Information Control System [IBM] 
 
CID 
CID is an abbreviation for Caller ID [Telephony] (see also: CLID, ANI) 
Central Institute for the Deaf 
Charge Injection Device (see CCD) 
Computer Integrated Design 
 
CIDIN 
CIDIN is an abbreviation for Common Icao Data Interchange Network 
 
CIM 
CIM is an abbreviation for Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
 
CIO 
CIO is an abbreviation for Chief Information Officer 
 
CIRRIS 
CIRRIS is an abbreviation for Cryogenic InfraRed Radiance Instrument for 
Shuttle [Space] 
 
CISC 
CISC is an abbreviation for Complex Instruction Set Computer 
 
Cislunar 
Cislunar is an abbreviation for The space between the Earth and the Moon 
 
CIT 
CIT is an abbreviation for California Institute of Technology 
Case Institute of Technology (part of CWRU, Cleveland, OH) 
Circumstellar Imaging Telescope [Space] 
 
CLASP 
CLASP is an abbreviation for Comprehensive Logistics Automated Support 
Program 
 
CLASS 
CLASS is an abbreviation for Custom Local Area Signaling Service 
[Telephony] 
 
CLI 
CLI is an abbreviation for Command Line Interpreter 
 
CLID 
CLID is an abbreviation for Calling Line ID [Telephony] (see also: CID, 
ANI) 
 
CLNP 
CLNP is an abbreviation for Connectionless-mode Network Protocol 
 
CLNS 
CLNS is an abbreviation for Connectionless-mode Network Service 
 
CLR 
CLR is an abbreviation for Combined Line and Recording 
 
CLRC 
CLRC is an abbreviation for Circuit Layout Record Card 
 
CLU 
CLU is an abbreviation for Chartered Life Underwriter 
 
CLUT 
CLUT is an abbreviation for Color LookUp Table 
 
CM 
CM is an abbreviation for Command Module (Apollo spacecraft) [Space] 
Congregation of the Mission 
 
CM 
CM is an abbreviation for centimeters 
 
CMC 
CMC is an abbreviation for Communication Machinery Corp. 
 
CMD 
CMD is an abbreviation for Centralized Message Distribution 
 
CMIP 
CMIP is an abbreviation for Common Management Information Protocol 
 
CMIS 
CMIS is an abbreviation for Common Management Information Services 
 
CML 
CML is an abbreviation for Current Model Logic 
 
CMMU 
CMMU is an abbreviation for Cache/Memory Management Unit 
 
CMOS 
CMOS is an abbreviation for Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (see 
MOS) 
 
CMOT 
CMOT is an abbreviation for Common Management Information Services and 
Protocol Over TCP/IP 
 
CMRR 
CMRR is an abbreviation for Common Mode Rejection Ratio 
 
CMS 
CMS is an abbreviation for Circuit Maintenance System 
 
CMSgt 
CMSgt is an abbreviation for Chief Master Sergeant 
 
CMU 
CMU is an abbreviation for Carnegie-Mellon University 
 
CMYK 
CMYK is an abbreviation for Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, blacK 
 
CN 
CN is an abbreviation for Canadian National [Corporate name, Railroading] 
 
CN/A 
CN/A is an abbreviation for Customer Name / Address [Telephony] 
 
CNI 
CNI is an abbreviation for Common Network Interface [Telephony, AT&T] 
(Department of AT&T) 
 
CNN 
CNN is an abbreviation for Cable News Network 
 
CNO 
CNO is an abbreviation for Carbon-Nitrogen-Oxygen [Space] 
Chief of Naval Operations 
 
CNR 
CNR is an abbreviation for Canadian National Railways 
Carrier to Noise Ratio 
 
CNRI 
CNRI is an abbreviation for Corporation for National Research Initiatives 
 
CNRS 
CNRS is an abbreviation for Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
(French National Center for Scientific Research) 
 
CNS 
CNS is an abbreviation for Central Nervous System 
 
CNSR 
CNSR is an abbreviation for Comet Nucleus Sample Return [Space] 
 
CO 
CO is an abbreviation for Cash Order 
Central Office [Telephony] 
Colorado 
Commanding Officer 
Conscientious Objector 
 
COB 
COB is an abbreviation for Close Of Business 
 
COBE 
COBE is an abbreviation for COsmic Background Explorer [Space] 
 
COBOL 
COBOL is an abbreviation for COmmon Business Oriented Language 
 
COC 
COC is an abbreviation for Call of Cthulhu 
 
COCOT 
COCOT is an abbreviation for Customer Owned, Coin Operated Telephone 
[Telephony] 
 
COD 
COD is an abbreviation for Collect On Delivery; Cash On Delivery 
 
CODEC 
CODEC is an abbreviation for COder-DECoder 
 
COER 
COER is an abbreviation for Central Office Equipment Report 
 
COLA 
COLA is an abbreviation for Cost-Of-Living Allowance 
 
COM 
COM is an abbreviation for Computer Output (on) Microfiche 
Computer Output (on) Microfilm 
 
COMAS 
COMAS is an abbreviation for Central Office Maintenance and 
Administration System 
 
COMM 
COMM is an abbreviation for Communications 
 
COMPACT 
COMPACT is an abbreviation for COMmercial Product ACquisition Team 
 
COMPTEL 
COMPTEL is an abbreviation for COMPton TELescope (on GRO) [Space] 
 
COMSAT 
COMSAT is an abbreviation for Communications Satellite [Space] 
 
CONACYT 
CONACYT is an abbreviation for Consejo Nacional de Cienca Y Tecnologia 
(Mexican National Council of Science and Technology) 
 
CONS 
CONS is an abbreviation for CONStruct (LISP) 
Connection-Oriented Networking Service 
Connection-Oriented Networking Session 
 
CORE 
CORE is an abbreviation for COntrolled Requirement Expression 
 
CORN 
CORN is an abbreviation for COmputer Resource Nucleus 
 
COS 
COS is an abbreviation for Corporation for Open Systems 
 
COSINE 
COSINE is an abbreviation for Cooperation for Open Systems 
Interconnection Networking in Europe 
 
COSMIC 
COSMIC is an abbreviation for COmmon System Main InterConnecting frame 
COmputer Software Management and Information Center 
 
COSMOS 
COSMOS is an abbreviation for COmputer System for Mainframe OperationS 
 
COSTAR 
COSTAR is an abbreviation for Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial 
Replacement [Space] 
 
COT 
COT is an abbreviation for Card Or Tape (NCR) 
 
CP 
CP is an abbreviation for Campus Police (MIT, others probably too) 
Canadian Pacific 
Chemically Pure 
CoPy 
Command Post 
Command Processor 
the Canadian Press 
 
CPA 
CPA is an abbreviation for Certified Public Accountant 
 
CPE 
CPE is an abbreviation for Customer Premises Equipment 
Customer Provided Equipment 
 
CPFF 
CPFF is an abbreviation for Cost Plus Fixed Fee 
 
CPI 
CPI is an abbreviation for Characters Per Inch 
Common Programming Interface 
 
CPL 
CPL is an abbreviation for Combined Programming Language 
 
CPM 
CPM is an abbreviation for Control Program Monitor (sometimes CP/M) 
Control Program for Microcomputers (sometimes CP/M) 
 
CPO 
CPO is an abbreviation for Chief Petty Officer 
Chief Post Office 
 
CPR 
CPR is an abbreviation for Canadian Pacific Railway 
 
CPS 
CPS is an abbreviation for Characters Per Second 
 
CPSR 
CPSR is an abbreviation for Computer Professionals for Social 
Responsibility 
 
CPT 
CPT is an abbreviation for CaPTain 
 
CPU 
CPU is an abbreviation for Central Processing Unit 
 
CPW 
CPW is an abbreviation for Certified Public Weigher 
 
CQ 
CQ is an abbreviation for Change of Quarters 
 
CR 
CR is an abbreviation for Carriage Return (ASCII 15 octal) 
 
CRA 
CRA is an abbreviation for Cambridge Redevelopment Authority 
 
CRAF 
CRAF is an abbreviation for Comet Rendezvous / Asteroid Flyby [Space] 
 
CRAM 
CRAM is an abbreviation for Card Random Access Memory (NCR, but maybe 
others) 
 
CRC 
CRC is an abbreviation for Chemical Rubber Company 
Cyclic Redundancy Check 
 
CREG 
CREG is an abbreviation for Concentrated Range Extension with Gain 
 
CREN 
CREN is an abbreviation for The Corporation for Research and Educational 
Networking (merge of BITNET and CSNet) 
 
CRRES 
CRRES is an abbreviation for Combined Release / Radiation Effects 
Satellite [Space] 
Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite [NASA] 
 
CRT 
CRT is an abbreviation for Cathode Ray Tube (also generic reference to a 
terminal) 
 
CRTC 
CRTC is an abbreviation for Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission 
 
CS 
CS is an abbreviation for Civil Servant 
Computer Science; Computing Science 
County Seat 
 
CSA 
CSA is an abbreviation for Confederate States of America 
 
CSAB 
CSAB is an abbreviation for Computing Sciences Accreditation Board 
 
CSACS 
CSACS is an abbreviation for Centralized Status, Alarm and Control System 
 
CSC 
CSC is an abbreviation for Computer Sciences Corporation 
 
CSDC 
CSDC is an abbreviation for Circuit Switched Digital Capability 
 
CSF 
CSF is an abbreviation for Critical Success Factor 
 
CSI 
CSI is an abbreviation for Commercial Systems Integration 
 
CSIS 
CSIS is an abbreviation for Canadian Security and Intelligence Service 
 
CSL 
CSL is an abbreviation for Coin Supervising Link 
 
CSM 
CSM is an abbreviation for Command Sergeant Major 
Command and Service Module (Apollo spacecraft) [Space] 
 
CSMA 
CSMA is an abbreviation for Carrier Sense Multiple Access 
 
CSMA/CA 
CSMA/CA is an abbreviation for Carrier Sense Multiple Access with 
Collision Avoidance 
 
CSMA/CD 
CSMA/CD is an abbreviation for Carrier Sense Multiple Access with 
Collision Detection 
 
CSNET 
CSNET is an abbreviation for Computer + Science Network (merged with 
BITNET to make CREN) 
 
CSO 
CSO is an abbreviation for Central Services Organization 
 
CSOC 
CSOC is an abbreviation for Consolidated Space Operations Center (at 
Colorado Springs) 
 
CSP 
CSP is an abbreviation for Control Switching Point 
 
CSR 
CSR is an abbreviation for Control and Status Register 
Customer Service Representative [Telephony] 
 
CSRG 
CSRG is an abbreviation for Computer Systems Research Group 
 
CSRS 
CSRS is an abbreviation for civil Service Retirement System 
 
CSS 
CSS is an abbreviation for Customer Switching System 
 
CST 
CST is an abbreviation for Central Standard Time 
 
CSU 
CSU is an abbreviation for Channel Service Unit 
 
CT 
CT is an abbreviation for Central Time 
Connecticut 
 
CTC 
CTC is an abbreviation for Canadian Transport Commission 
Centralized Traffic Control [Railroading] 
 
CTD 
CTD is an abbreviation for Computing and Telecommunications Division 
 
CTIO 
CTIO is an abbreviation for Cerro Tololo Inter-american Observatory 
Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory [Space] 
 
CTNE 
CTNE is an abbreviation for Compania Telefonica Nacional de Espana 
 
CTS 
CTS is an abbreviation for Clear To Send (EIA RS-232-C) 
Compatible Timesharing System 
 
CTV 
CTV is an abbreviation for Canadian TeleVision network 
 
CU 
CU is an abbreviation for Close-Up 
 
CUA 
CUA is an abbreviation for Common User Access 
 
CUL 
CUL is an abbreviation for See You Later [Net jargon] 
 
CV 
CV is an abbreviation for Curriculum Vitae 
 
CW 
CW is an abbreviation for Car Wars 
Chemical Warfare 
Child Welfare 
Churchwarden 
Churdwarden 
Continuous Wave 
 
CWO 
CWO is an abbreviation for Cash With Order 
Chief Warrant Officer 
 
CWRU 
CWRU is an abbreviation for Case Western Reserve University 
 
CXI 
CXI is an abbreviation for Common X-windows Interface 
 
CY 
CY is an abbreviation for Calendar Year 
 
CYO 
CYO is an abbreviation for Catholic Youth Organization 
 
CZ 
CZ is an abbreviation for Canal Zone 
 
D 
D is an abbreviation for Depth 
 
D&D 
D&D is an abbreviation for Dungeons & Dragons 
 
D/A 
D/A is an abbreviation for Digital to Analog converter 
 
D/F 
D/F is an abbreviation for Direction Finding 
 
DA 
DA is an abbreviation for Days after Acceptance 
Department of Agriculture 
Deposit Account 
Directory Assistance (/C = computerized, /M = Microfilm) [Telephony] 
District Attorney 
Don't Answer [Telephony] (may be more general) 
 
DA/C 
DA/C is an abbreviation for Directory Assistance/Computerized 
 
DA/M 
DA/M is an abbreviation for Directory Assistance/Microfilm 
 
DAC 
DAC is an abbreviation for Digital to Analog Converter 
 
DACCS 
DACCS is an abbreviation for Digital Access Cross Connect System 
[Telephony] (suspect, see DACS) 
 
DACS 
DACS is an abbreviation for Digital Access Cross-connect System 
[Telephony] 
 
DAD 
DAD is an abbreviation for Draft ADdendum 
 
DAG 
DAG is an abbreviation for Directed Acyclic Graph 
 
DAL 
DAL is an abbreviation for Dedicated Access Line [Telephony] 
 
DAP 
DAP is an abbreviation for Division Advisory Panel (of NSF (q.v.) DNCRI 
(q.v.)) 
 
DAR 
DAR is an abbreviation for Daughters of the American Revolution 
 
DARE 
DARE is an abbreviation for Drug Abuse Resistance Education 
 
DARPA 
DARPA is an abbreviation for Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(of the DoD, see also ARPA) 
 
DASD 
DASD is an abbreviation for Direct Access Storage Device 
 
DAT 
DAT is an abbreviation for Digital Audio Tape 
 
DATA 
DATA is an abbreviation for Defense Air Transport Administration 
 
DAV 
DAV is an abbreviation for Disabled American Veterans 
 
DB 
DB is an abbreviation for DataBase 
 
db 
db is an abbreviation for decibel(s) 
 
dba 
dba is an abbreviation for doing business as 
 
DBF 
DBF is an abbreviation for DBase Format 
 
DBME 
DBME is an abbreviation for DataBase Managment Environment 
 
dbms 
dbms is an abbreviation for DataBase Management System (rdbms for 
Relational ...) 
 
DBRAD 
DBRAD is an abbreviation for Data Base Relational Application Directory 
 
DC 
DC is an abbreviation for Direct Current (dc, see also AC) 
District of Columbia 
 
DCA 
DCA is an abbreviation for Defense Communications Agency 
Distributed Communication Architecture 
Document Content Architecture 
 
DCC 
DCC is an abbreviation for Descriptive Cataloging Committee 
 
DCCO 
DCCO is an abbreviation for Defense Commercial Communications Office 
 
DCD 
DCD is an abbreviation for Data Carrier Detect (sometimes CD (q.v.)) (EIA 
RS-232-C) 
 
DCE 
DCE is an abbreviation for Data Communication Equipment 
 
DCL 
DCL is an abbreviation for Digital Command Language 
 
DCP 
DCP is an abbreviation for Distributed Communications Processor 
 
DCTS 
DCTS is an abbreviation for Dimension Custom Telephone Service 
 
DD 
DD is an abbreviation for Daredevils 
Data Dictionary 
Days after Date 
Demand Draft 
Dishonorable Discharge 
Disk Drive 
Doctor of Divinity 
 
DDC 
DDC is an abbreviation for Digital Data Converter 
 
DDCU 
DDCU is an abbreviation for DC-to-DC Converter Unit [Space] 
 
DDD 
DDD is an abbreviation for Direct Distance Dialing [Telephony] 
(principally US, elsewhere STD) 
 
DDL 
DDL is an abbreviation for Document Description Language 
 
DDN 
DDN is an abbreviation for Defense Data Network 
 
DDP 
DDP is an abbreviation for Distributed Data Processing 
 
DDS 
DDS is an abbreviation for Dataphone Digital Service [AT&T] 
Digital Data Service 
Direct Digital Service 
Doctor of Dental Science 
Doctor of Dental Surgery 
 
DDT 
DDT is an abbreviation for DEC Debugging Tape 
Di-<something> (pesticide) 
Dynamic Debugging Technique 
 
DE 
DE is an abbreviation for Delaware 
 
DEA 
DEA is an abbreviation for Drug Enforcement Agency [US Government] 
 
DEAR 
DEAR is an abbreviation for Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation 
 
DEC 
DEC is an abbreviation for Digital Equipment Corporation [Corporate name] 
 
DECUS 
DECUS is an abbreviation for Digital Equipment Corporation Users Society 
 
DES 
DES is an abbreviation for Data Encryption Standard [NIST] 
 
DEW 
DEW is an abbreviation for Distant Early Warning (as in DEW Line) 
 
DF 
DF is an abbreviation for Damage Free 
 
DFC 
DFC is an abbreviation for Distinguished Flying Cross 
 
DFD 
DFD is an abbreviation for Data Flow Diagram 
 
DFE 
DFE is an abbreviation for Data Flow Editor 
 
DFM 
DFM is an abbreviation for Distinguished Flying Medal 
 
DFN 
DFN is an abbreviation for Deutsche Forschungsnetz Verein (German 
Research Network Association) 
 
DFRF 
DFRF is an abbreviation for Dryden Flight Research Facility [Space] 
 
DFS 
DFS is an abbreviation for Depth-First Search 
 
DFW 
DFW is an abbreviation for Dallas-Ft.Worth (regional airport) 
 
DG 
DG is an abbreviation for Data General [Corporate name] 
Dei Gratia (by the grace of God) 
Director General 
 
DGSC 
DGSC is an abbreviation for Defense General Supply Center 
 
DHHS 
DHHS is an abbreviation for Department of Health and Human Services 
 
DHSS 
DHSS is an abbreviation for Department of Health and Social Security 
(British) 
british Department of Health and Social Security 
 
DIA 
DIA is an abbreviation for Document Interchange Architecture 
 
DIAD 
DIAD is an abbreviation for (magnetic) Drum Information Assembler / 
Dispatcher 
 
DIAL 
DIAL is an abbreviation for Direct Information Access Line 
 
DIAS 
DIAS is an abbreviation for Defense Automatic Integrated System 
 
DID 
DID is an abbreviation for Direct Inward Dialing [Telephony] 
 
DIF 
DIF is an abbreviation for Document Interchange Format 
 
DIN 
DIN is an abbreviation for Deutsches Institut fur Normung 
 
DIRE 
DIRE is an abbreviation for Dire Is Really Emacs 
 
DIS 
DIS is an abbreviation for Draft International Standard [ISO] 
 
DISA 
DISA is an abbreviation for Data Interchange Standards Association 
 
DISOSS 
DISOSS is an abbreviation for Distributed Office Support System [IBM] 
 
DIY 
DIY is an abbreviation for Do It Yourself 
 
DJ 
DJ is an abbreviation for Disc Jockey 
 
DLA 
DLA is an abbreviation for Defense Logistics Agency 
 
DLI 
DLI is an abbreviation for Data Link Interface(?) 
 
DLL 
DLL is an abbreviation for Data Link Layer [ISO OSI] 
Dial Long Line equipment 
 
DLO 
DLO is an abbreviation for Dead Letter Office 
 
DM 
DM is an abbreviation for Dungeon Master 
 
DMA 
DMA is an abbreviation for Direct Memory Access 
 
DMD 
DMD is an abbreviation for Doctor of Dental Medicine 
 
DME 
DME is an abbreviation for Distance Measuring Equipment 
 
DMF 
DMF is an abbreviation for Probably part of an X.400 address in Europe 
 
DMOS 
DMOS is an abbreviation for Diffusion Metal Oxide Semiconductor (see MOS) 
 
DMSP 
DMSP is an abbreviation for Defense Meteorological Satellite Program 
[Space] 
 
DMV 
DMV is an abbreviation for Department of Motor Vehicles 
Department of Motor Vehicles (Calif) 
 
DMZ 
DMZ is an abbreviation for DeMilitarized Zone 
 
DNA 
DNA is an abbreviation for DeoxyriboNucleic Acid 
Digital Network Architecture [DEC] 
 
DNCRI 
DNCRI is an abbreviation for [NSF] (q.v.) Division of Networking and 
Communications Research and Infrastructure 
 
DNHR 
DNHR is an abbreviation for Dynamic NonHierarchical Routing 
 
DNIC 
DNIC is an abbreviation for Data Network Identification Code [Telephony] 
 
DNIS 
DNIS is an abbreviation for Dialed Number Identification Service (see 
also DID) [Telephony] 
 
DNL 
DNL is an abbreviation for Director of Naval Laboratories 
 
DNR 
DNR is an abbreviation for Dialed Number Recorder [Telephony] 
 
DNS 
DNS is an abbreviation for Domain Name System 
 
DOA 
DOA is an abbreviation for Dead On Arrival 
 
DOB 
DOB is an abbreviation for Date Of Birth 
 
DOC 
DOC is an abbreviation for Dynamic Overload Control 
 
DOD 
DOD is an abbreviation for Department Of Defense [US Government] 
(sometimes DoD) 
 
DOE 
DOE is an abbreviation for Department of Energy [US Government] 
 
DOHC 
DOHC is an abbreviation for Dual OverHead Cams [Automotive] 
 
DOMAIN 
DOMAIN is an abbreviation for Distributed Operating Multi Access 
Interactive Network (Apollo) 
 
DOS 
DOS is an abbreviation for Disk Operating System 
 
DOT 
DOT is an abbreviation for Department Of Transportation [US Government] 
 
DOT&E 
DOT&E is an abbreviation for Director, Operational Test and Evaluation 
 
DOV 
DOV is an abbreviation for Data Over Voice [Telephony] 
 
DOY 
DOY is an abbreviation for Day of Year 
 
DP 
DP is an abbreviation for Data Processing 
Dial Pulse [Telephony] 
Displaced Persons (expelled from native land) 
Display Postscript 
Double Penetration 
Double Play 
Draft Proposal 
 
DPA 
DPA is an abbreviation for Delegation of Procurement Authority 
 
DPANS 
DPANS is an abbreviation for Draft Proposed American National Standard 
 
DPI 
DPI is an abbreviation for Dots Per Inch 
 
DPS 
DPS is an abbreviation for Display PostScript 
 
DQ 
DQ is an abbreviation for Dairy Queen 
Dragon Quest 
 
DQDB 
DQDB is an abbreviation for Distributed Queue Dual Bus (IEEE 802.6) 
[Telephony, Networking] 
 
DQL 
DQL is an abbreviation for Database Query Language 
 
DR 
DR is an abbreviation for Dead Reckoning 
Dining Room 
 
DRAM 
DRAM is an abbreviation for Dynamic Random Access Memory (as opposed to 
static RAM) 
 
DRD 
DRD is an abbreviation for Data Reading Device 
 
DRE 
DRE is an abbreviation for Directional Reservation Equipment 
 
DRG 
DRG is an abbreviation for Democratic Republic of Germany (East Germany) 
 
DRI 
DRI is an abbreviation for Defense Research Internet 
Digital Research, Incorporated [Corporate name] 
 
DS 
DS is an abbreviation for Double-Sided 
Draft Standard 
 
DSA 
DSA is an abbreviation for Dial System Assistance 
 
DSE 
DSE is an abbreviation for Data Structure Editor 
 
DSEE 
DSEE is an abbreviation for Domain Software Engineering Environment 
 
DSM 
DSM is an abbreviation for Distinguished Service Medal 
 
DSO 
DSO is an abbreviation for Distinguished Service Order 
 
DSP 
DSP is an abbreviation for Decessit Sine Prole (died without issue) 
Digital Signal Processing 
 
DSRI 
DSRI is an abbreviation for Digital Standard Relational Interface 
 
DSS 
DSS is an abbreviation for Decision Support System 
Direct Station Selection [Telephony] 
 
DST 
DST is an abbreviation for Daylight Saving Time 
 
DSTN 
DSTN is an abbreviation for Double SuperTwisted Nematic 
 
DSU 
DSU is an abbreviation for Digital Service Unit 
 
DT 
DT is an abbreviation for Delirium Tremens 
 
DTE 
DTE is an abbreviation for Data Terminal Equipment 
 
DTF 
DTF is an abbreviation for Dial Tone First payphone [Telephony] 
 
DTMF 
DTMF is an abbreviation for Dial Tone Multi Frequency [Telephony] 
 
DTP 
DTP is an abbreviation for DeskTop Publishing 
 
DTR 
DTR is an abbreviation for Data Terminal Ready (EIA RS-232-C) 
 
DUI 
DUI is an abbreviation for Driving Under the Influence 
 
DUT 
DUT is an abbreviation for Device Under Test 
 
DV 
DV is an abbreviation for Deo Vo lente (God willing) 
 
DVM 
DVM is an abbreviation for Digital Volt Meter 
Doctor of Veterinary Medicine 
 
DWAPS 
DWAPS is an abbreviation for Defense Warehousing Automated Processing 
System 
 
DWI 
DWI is an abbreviation for Died Without Issue [Genealogy] 
Driving While Intoxicated 
 
DWIM 
DWIM is an abbreviation for Do What I Mean 
 
DX 
DX is an abbreviation for Distance (as in long distance radio 
communication) 
 
DXT 
DXT is an abbreviation for Data eXtractT facility 
 
E 
E is an abbreviation for East 
Espionage 
 
E&EO 
E&EO is an abbreviation for Errors and Omissions Excepted 
 
E&M 
E&M is an abbreviation for ``Ear and Mouth''; receive and transmit leads 
of a signalling system 
 
E-MAIL 
E-MAIL is an abbreviation for Electronic MAIL 
 
e.g. 
e.g. is an abbreviation for ??? (Latin(?): for example) 
 
EADASS 
EADASS is an abbreviation for Engineering and Administrative Data 
AcquiSition System 
 
EAFB 
EAFB is an abbreviation for Edwards Air Force Base [Space] 
 
EAN 
EAN is an abbreviation for Certainly part of an X.400 Address in Europe 
 
EARN 
EARN is an abbreviation for European Academic Research Network 
 
EAS 
EAS is an abbreviation for Extended Area Service (or Engineering Admin. 
System) 
 
EASI 
EASI is an abbreviation for European Academic Supercomputer Initiative 
(of IBM) 
 
EBCDIC 
EBCDIC is an abbreviation for Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange 
Code 
 
EC 
EC is an abbreviation for Exchange Carrier [Telephony] 
 
ECAFE 
ECAFE is an abbreviation for Economic Commission for Africa and the Far 
East 
 
ECASS 
ECASS is an abbreviation for Electronically Controlled Automatic 
Switching System 
Export Control Automated Support System 
 
ECC 
ECC is an abbreviation for Error Correction Code 
Error Correction Code (corrects error in memory or transmission) 
 
ECCM 
ECCM is an abbreviation for Electronic Counter-CounterMeasures 
 
ECDO 
ECDO is an abbreviation for Electronic Community Dial Office 
 
ECG 
ECG is an abbreviation for ElectroCardioGram 
 
ECL 
ECL is an abbreviation for Emitter Coupled Logic (see also TTL) 
 
ECLSS 
ECLSS is an abbreviation for Environmental Control and Life Support 
System [Space] 
 
ECM 
ECM is an abbreviation for Electronic Counter Measure 
European Common Market 
 
ECMA 
ECMA is an abbreviation for European Computer Manufacturers Association 
 
ECO 
ECO is an abbreviation for Ecological 
Electronic Central Office 
Engineering Change Order 
 
ECPA 
ECPA is an abbreviation for Electronic Communications Privacy Act [US 
law] 
 
ECS 
ECS is an abbreviation for Environmental Control System [Space] 
 
ECT 
ECT is an abbreviation for ElectroConvulsive Therapy 
 
ECV 
ECV is an abbreviation for Electric Cargo Vehicle [NASA OEXP] 
 
ED&D 
ED&D is an abbreviation for Expert Dungeons & Dragons 
 
EDGAR 
EDGAR is an abbreviation for Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and 
Retrieval 
 
EDI 
EDI is an abbreviation for Electronic Data Interchange 
 
EDIF 
EDIF is an abbreviation for Electronic Design Interchange Format 
 
EDO 
EDO is an abbreviation for Extended Duration Orbiter [Space] 
 
EDP 
EDP is an abbreviation for Electronic Data Processing 
 
EDS 
EDS is an abbreviation for Electronic Data Systems 
 
EDT 
EDT is an abbreviation for Eastern Daylight Time 
 
EDTA 
EDTA is an abbreviation for Ethylene Diamine Tetraacetic Acid 
 
EDTCC 
EDTCC is an abbreviation for Electronic Data Transmission Communications 
Central 
 
EE 
EE is an abbreviation for Electrical Engineer 
Electrical or Electronics Engineer 
 
EEC 
EEC is an abbreviation for European Economic Community 
European Economic Comunity 
 
EEG 
EEG is an abbreviation for ElectroEncephaloGram 
 
EEL 
EEL is an abbreviation for Epsilon Extension Language 
 
EEPROM 
EEPROM is an abbreviation for Electrically Erasable Programmable Read 
Only Memory 
 
EFF 
EFF is an abbreviation for Electronic Frontier Foundation 
 
EGA 
EGA is an abbreviation for Enhanced Graphics Adapter 
 
EGP 
EGP is an abbreviation for Exterior Gateway Protocol [Internet] 
 
EGRET 
EGRET is an abbreviation for Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (on 
GRO) [Space] 
 
EHF 
EHF is an abbreviation for Extremely High Frequency (30-300GHz) 
 
EIA 
EIA is an abbreviation for Electronic Industries Association 
 
EINE 
EINE is an abbreviation for EINE Is Not Emacs 
 
EISA 
EISA is an abbreviation for Extended Industry-Standard Architecture 
 
EISS 
EISS is an abbreviation for European Intelligence Support System 
 
EKG 
EKG is an abbreviation for ElectroKardioGramm (see ECG) 
 
EL 
EL is an abbreviation for ElectroLuminescent (as in display) 
 
ELF 
ELF is an abbreviation for Extremely Low Frequency 
 
ELO 
ELO is an abbreviation for Electric Light Orchestra 
 
ELP 
ELP is an abbreviation for Emerson, Lake and Palmer (or Powell) 
 
ELV 
ELV is an abbreviation for Expendable Launch Vehicle [Space] 
 
EM 
EM is an abbreviation for Enlisted Man (see EW) 
 
EMA 
EMA is an abbreviation for Electronic Mail Association 
 
EMACS 
EMACS is an abbreviation for Editor MACroS 
Eight Megabytes And Constantly Swapping 
 
EMF 
EMF is an abbreviation for ElectroMotive Force 
ElectroMotive Force (voltage) 
 
EMI 
EMI is an abbreviation for ElectroMagnetic Interference 
 
EMP 
EMP is an abbreviation for Electromagnetic Pulse 
 
EMPRESS 
EMPRESS is an abbreviation for EnvironMental Pulse Radiation Environment 
Simulator for Ships 
 
EMR 
EMR is an abbreviation for ElectroMagetic Response 
ElectroMagnetic Response 
 
EMS 
EMS is an abbreviation for Electronic Message System 
Extended Memory Specification 
 
EMT 
EMT is an abbreviation for Emergency Medical Technician 
 
EMU 
EMU is an abbreviation for ElectroMagnetic Unit 
Extravehicular Mobility Unit [Space] 
 
ENIAC 
ENIAC is an abbreviation for Electronic Numerical Integrator and 
Calculator 
 
ENS 
ENS is an abbreviation for ENSign 
 
EO 
EO is an abbreviation for End Office [Telephony] 
Erasable Optical 
 
EOF 
EOF is an abbreviation for End Of File 
 
EOM 
EOM is an abbreviation for End Of Month 
 
EOS 
EOS is an abbreviation for Earth Observing System [Space] 
 
EOWG 
EOWG is an abbreviation for Engineering and Operations Working Group 
(under FNC) 
 
EP 
EP is an abbreviation for Experience Points 
Extended Play 
 
EPA 
EPA is an abbreviation for Environmental Protection Agency 
 
EPOS 
EPOS is an abbreviation for Engineering and Project-management Oriented 
Support system 
 
EPRI 
EPRI is an abbreviation for Electric Power Research Institute 
 
EPROM 
EPROM is an abbreviation for Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory 
 
EPS 
EPS is an abbreviation for Encapsulated PostScript 
 
EPT 
EPT is an abbreviation for Empire of the Petal Throne 
 
EQ 
EQ is an abbreviation for Educational Quotient (see IQ) 
 
ER 
ER is an abbreviation for Emergency Room 
 
ERA 
ERA is an abbreviation for Earned Run Average 
Entity-Relationship-Attribute 
Equal Rights Amendment 
 
ERD 
ERD is an abbreviation for Entity-Relation Diagram 
 
ERE 
ERE is an abbreviation for Entity Relationship Editor 
 
ERT 
ERT is an abbreviation for Earth Resources Technology [Space] 
 
ES 
ES is an abbreviation for Expert System 
 
ESA 
ESA is an abbreviation for European Space Agency 
European Space Agency [Space] 
 
ESAC 
ESAC is an abbreviation for Electronic Systems Assistance Center 
 
ESDI 
ESDI is an abbreviation for Enhanced Standard Device Interface 
 
ESE 
ESE is an abbreviation for East South East 
 
ESF 
ESF is an abbreviation for Extended Superframe Format [Telephony] 
 
ESM 
ESM is an abbreviation for Electronic Support Measures 
 
ESnet 
ESnet is an abbreviation for Energy Sciences network (DoE) [Networking] 
 
ESO 
ESO is an abbreviation for European Southern Observatory 
European Southern Observatory [Space] 
 
ESP 
ESP is an abbreviation for Extra Sensory Perception 
 
ESPS 
ESPS is an abbreviation for Entropic Signal Processing System 
 
ESS 
ESS is an abbreviation for Electronic Switching System [Telephony] 
 
ESSEX 
ESSEX is an abbreviation for Experimental Solid State EXchange 
 
EST 
EST is an abbreviation for Eastern Standard Time 
 
ET 
ET is an abbreviation for (Shuttle) External Tank [Space] 
Eastern Time 
Extra Terrestrial [Space] 
 
ET/ACC 
ET/ACC is an abbreviation for External Tank/Aft Cargo Carrier (see also 
ET) [Space] 
 
ETA 
ETA is an abbreviation for Estimated Time of Arrival 
 
ETC 
ETC is an abbreviation for Et cetera, and so on... 
 
ETD 
ETD is an abbreviation for Estimated Time of Departure 
 
ETFD 
ETFD is an abbreviation for Electronic Toll Fraud Device [Telephony] 
 
ETH 
ETH is an abbreviation for Eidgn\:oessiche Technische Hochschule (Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology) 
 
ETLA 
ETLA is an abbreviation for Extended Three Letter Acronym [Space] 
 
ETO 
ETO is an abbreviation for Earth-to-Orbit [Space] 
 
ETR 
ETR is an abbreviation for Eastern Test Range [Space] 
 
ETS 
ETS is an abbreviation for Electronic Translator System 
 
ETV 
ETV is an abbreviation for Education TeleVision 
 
EUUG 
EUUG is an abbreviation for European Unix User Group 
 
EUV 
EUV is an abbreviation for Extreme UltraViolet 
Extreme UltraViolet [Space] 
 
EUVE 
EUVE is an abbreviation for Extreme UltraViolet Explorer [Space] 
 
EVA 
EVA is an abbreviation for ExtraVehicular Activity 
ExtraVehicular Activity [Space] 
 
EVX 
EVX is an abbreviation for Electronic Voice eXchange 
 
EW 
EW is an abbreviation for Electronic Warfare 
Enlisted Woman (see EM) 
 
EWOS 
EWOS is an abbreviation for European Workshop for Open Systems 
 
FA 
FA is an abbreviation for Football Association (British soccer--a word 
derived from Association) 
 
FAA 
FAA is an abbreviation for Federal Aviation Agency [US Government] 
 
FACD 
FACD is an abbreviation for Foreign Area Customer Dialing 
 
FAO 
FAO is an abbreviation for Food and Agriculture Organization [US 
Government] 
 
FAQ 
FAQ is an abbreviation for Frequently Asked Questions [Space] 
 
FAR 
FAR is an abbreviation for Federal Acquisition Regulations 
 
FAS 
FAS is an abbreviation for Foreign Agricultural Service 
Free Alongside Ship 
 
FASST 
FASST is an abbreviation for Flexible Architecture Standard System 
Technology 
 
FAST 
FAST is an abbreviation for Fast Auroral SnapshoT explorer [Space] 
 
FAT 
FAT is an abbreviation for Foreign Area Translation 
 
FAX 
FAX is an abbreviation for FAcsimile 
 
FB 
FB is an abbreviation for Freight Bill 
 
FBI 
FBI is an abbreviation for Federal Bureau of Investigation [US 
Government] 
 
FCC 
FCC is an abbreviation for Federal Communications Commission [US 
Government] 
Federal Computer Conference 
 
FCCSET 
FCCSET is an abbreviation for Federal Coordinating Committee for Science, 
Education and Technology (under OSTP) {Maybe Eng. for Edu.??} 
 
FCO 
FCO is an abbreviation for Field Change Order 
Frequency Controlled Oscillator 
 
FCS 
FCS is an abbreviation for Frame Check Sequence 
 
FDA 
FDA is an abbreviation for Food and Drug Administration [US Government] 
 
FDDI 
FDDI is an abbreviation for Fiber Digital Data Interface 
Fiber Distributed Data Interface 
 
FDHD 
FDHD is an abbreviation for Floppy Drive High Density 
 
FDIC 
FDIC is an abbreviation for Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation [US Government] 
 
FDM 
FDM is an abbreviation for Frequency Division Multiplexing 
 
FDR 
FDR is an abbreviation for Franklin Delano Roosevelt [US President] 
 
FE 
FE is an abbreviation for Field Engineer (see also CE, SE) 
 
FEA 
FEA is an abbreviation for Finite Element Analysis 
 
FEDSIM 
FEDSIM is an abbreviation for FEDeral Systems Integration and Management 
center 
 
FEMA 
FEMA is an abbreviation for Federal Emergency Management Agency 
 
FEMF 
FEMF is an abbreviation for Foreign EMF (q.v.) (a.k.a. Cross Battery) 
[Telephony] 
 
FEPC 
FEPC is an abbreviation for Fair Employment Practices Commission 
 
FEPG 
FEPG is an abbreviation for Federal Engineering Planning Group (of FNC 
under EOWG, originally of FRICC) 
 
FERS 
FERS is an abbreviation for Federal Employees Retirement System 
 
FET 
FET is an abbreviation for Federal Excise Tax 
Field Effect Transistor 
 
FFA 
FFA is an abbreviation for Future Farmers of America 
 
FFT 
FFT is an abbreviation for Fast Fourier Transform 
Fast Fourier Transform [Space] 
 
FG-A 
FG-A is an abbreviation for Feature Group A [Telephony] (Line Side 
termination for LD carriers) 
 
FG-B 
FG-B is an abbreviation for Feature Group B [Telephony] (Trunk Side 
termination for LD carriers (aka ENFIA B), 950 service) 
 
FG-D 
FG-D is an abbreviation for Feature Group D [Telephony] (Trunk Side 
termination for LD carriers, 1+ service) 
 
FGS 
FGS is an abbreviation for Fine Guidance Sensors (on HST) [Space] 
 
FHA 
FHA is an abbreviation for Federal Home Administration 
Future Homemakers of America 
 
FIB 
FIB is an abbreviation for Focused Ion Beam 
 
FICA 
FICA is an abbreviation for Federal Insurance Contributions Act 
 
FIDO 
FIDO is an abbreviation for Fog Investigation Dispersal Operation 
 
FIFO 
FIFO is an abbreviation for First In First Out (as in registers and 
buffers) 
 
FILO 
FILO is an abbreviation for First In Last Out (see also FIFO) 
 
FIMS 
FIMS is an abbreviation for Forms Interface Management System 
 
FINE 
FINE is an abbreviation for FINE Is Not Emacs 
 
FIO 
FIO is an abbreviation for Frequency In and Out 
 
FIPS 
FIPS is an abbreviation for Federal Information Processing Standard 
 
FIR 
FIR is an abbreviation for Far InfraRed [Space] 
Finite Impulse Response 
 
FIRMR 
FIRMR is an abbreviation for Federal Information Resource Management 
Regulation 
 
FIT 
FIT is an abbreviation for Federal Information Technologies, inc. 
 
FITS 
FITS is an abbreviation for Flexible Image Transport System [Space] 
 
FIX 
FIX is an abbreviation for Federal Inter-agency eXchange [Networking] 
 
FL 
FL is an abbreviation for Florida 
 
FLACC 
FLACC is an abbreviation for Full Level Algol Checkout Compiler 
 
FLL 
FLL is an abbreviation for Fixed Loss Loop [Telephony] 
 
FLOP 
FLOP is an abbreviation for FLoating point OPeration 
 
FLOPS 
FLOPS is an abbreviation for FLoating-point OPerations per Second 
 
FLRA 
FLRA is an abbreviation for Federal Labor Relations Authority 
 
FM 
FM is an abbreviation for Frequency Modulation 
 
FMB 
FMB is an abbreviation for Federal Maritime Board 
 
FMCS 
FMCS is an abbreviation for Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service 
 
FMR 
FMR is an abbreviation for Follow Me Roaming [Telephony] 
 
FMS 
FMS is an abbreviation for Financial Management Service (Treasury Dept) 
Forms Management System 
 
FNC 
FNC is an abbreviation for Federal Networking Council (formerly FRICC) 
[US Government] (under OSTP) 
 
FO 
FO is an abbreviation for Foreign Office 
Forward Observer 
 
FOAC 
FOAC is an abbreviation for Federal Office Automation Center 
 
FOB 
FOB is an abbreviation for Free On Board 
Full Of Bull (aperiodical of) [TMRC] 
 
FOC 
FOC is an abbreviation for Faint Object Camera (on HST) [Space] 
Free Of Charge 
 
FOIA 
FOIA is an abbreviation for Freedom Of Information Act 
 
FOIMS 
FOIMS is an abbreviation for Field Office Information Management System 
 
FOOBAR 
FOOBAR is an abbreviation for See FUBAR [Net jargon] 
 
FOR 
FOR is an abbreviation for Free On Rail 
 
FORCS 
FORCS is an abbreviation for Faa's Operational Reporting Communication 
System 
 
FORD 
FORD is an abbreviation for Fix Or Repair Daily [Humor] 
Found On Road Dead [Humor] 
 
FORTRAN 
FORTRAN is an abbreviation for FORmula TRANslator 
 
FOS 
FOS is an abbreviation for Faint Object Spectrograph (on HST) [Space] 
 
FOSE 
FOSE is an abbreviation for Federal Office Systems Exposition 
 
FOT 
FOT is an abbreviation for Free On Truck 
 
FOV 
FOV is an abbreviation for Field Of View 
 
FPA 
FPA is an abbreviation for Floating Point Accelerator 
 
FPC 
FPC is an abbreviation for Fish Protein Concentrate 
 
FPE 
FPE is an abbreviation for Floating Point Engine 
 
FPHA 
FPHA is an abbreviation for Federal Public Housing Authority 
 
FPLA 
FPLA is an abbreviation for Field Programmable Logic Array (see PLA) 
 
FPM 
FPM is an abbreviation for Feet Per Minute 
 
FPO 
FPO is an abbreviation for Field Post Office 
Fleet Post Office 
 
fps 
fps is an abbreviation for Feet Per Second 
 
FPU 
FPU is an abbreviation for Floating Point Unit 
 
FQDN 
FQDN is an abbreviation for Fully Qualified Domain Name [TCP/IP] (DNS) 
 
FR 
FR is an abbreviation for Frame Relay [Telephony, Networking] 
 
FRACTAL 
FRACTAL is an abbreviation for FRACTional dimensionAL 
 
FRED 
FRED is an abbreviation for Fred Resembles Emacs Deliberately 
 
FRG 
FRG is an abbreviation for Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) 
 
FRICC 
FRICC is an abbreviation for Federal Research Internet Coordinating 
Committee (now FNC, q.v.) [Networking, US Government] 
 
FROG 
FROG is an abbreviation for Free Rocket Over Ground 
 
FRPG 
FRPG is an abbreviation for Fantasy Role Playing Game 
 
FRS 
FRS is an abbreviation for Federal Reserve System 
 
FS 
FS is an abbreviation for Field Service 
File System 
Full Standard 
 
FSF 
FSF is an abbreviation for Free Software Foundation 
 
FSK 
FSK is an abbreviation for Frequency Shift Keying 
 
FSLIC 
FSLIC is an abbreviation for Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation 
 
FSS 
FSS is an abbreviation for Federal Supply Service 
 
FSW 
FSW is an abbreviation for Forward Swept Wings 
 
Ft 
Ft is an abbreviation for Foot 
 
FTAM 
FTAM is an abbreviation for File Transfer And Management (ISO upscale 
FTP) 
 
FTC 
FTC is an abbreviation for Federal Trade Commission 
 
FTL 
FTL is an abbreviation for Faster Than Light 
 
FTP 
FTP is an abbreviation for File Transfer Protocol (esp. of the TCP/IP 
suite) 
 
FTS 
FTS is an abbreviation for Federal Telecommunications System [Telephony, 
US Government] 
Flight Telerobotic Servicer [Space] 
 
FUBAR 
FUBAR is an abbreviation for F***ed Up Beyond All Recognition/Repair 
Fouled Up Beyond All Recognition/Repair 
 
FUSE 
FUSE is an abbreviation for Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer 
[Space] 
 
FW 
FW is an abbreviation for Fringeworthy 
 
FWD 
FWD is an abbreviation for Front Wheel Drive 
 
FWHM 
FWHM is an abbreviation for Full Width at Half Maximum [Space] 
 
FX 
FX is an abbreviation for Foriegn eXchange [Telephony] 
 
FY 
FY is an abbreviation for Fiscal Year 
 
FYI 
FYI is an abbreviation for For Your Information 
 
G 
G is an abbreviation for General audiences [Movie rating] 
Gravity 
 
GA 
GA is an abbreviation for Gamblers Anonymous 
General Assembly 
General Average 
General of the Army 
Georgia 
 
GAAP 
GAAP is an abbreviation for Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
 
GAB 
GAB is an abbreviation for Group Audio Bridging [Telephony] 
 
Gaia 
Gaia is an abbreviation for Earth's self-sustaining Biosphere (Not an 
acronym, from some ancient language, I think) 
 
GAN 
GAN is an abbreviation for Global Area Network 
 
GAO 
GAO is an abbreviation for General Accounting Office [US Government] 
 
GAR 
GAR is an abbreviation for Grand Army of the Republic 
 
GARR 
GARR is an abbreviation for Gruppo Arminizzazione Rete por la Ricerca 
(Italian Research Network Harmonization Group) 
 
GAS 
GAS is an abbreviation for Get-Away Special [Space] 
 
GATT 
GATT is an abbreviation for General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
 
GAW 
GAW is an abbreviation for Guaranteed Annual Wage 
Guarenteed Annual Wage 
 
GB 
GB is an abbreviation for Gangbusters 
GigaByte 
Great Britain 
 
GBIP 
GBIP is an abbreviation for General Purpose Interface Bus 
 
GBT 
GBT is an abbreviation for Green Bank Telescope [Space] 
 
GC 
GC is an abbreviation for Garbage Collection (LISP) 
Gas Chromatograph (or Chromatography) 
 
GCA 
GCA is an abbreviation for Ground Controlled Approach 
 
GCC 
GCC is an abbreviation for Gnu C Compiler 
 
GCD 
GCD is an abbreviation for Ground Controlled Descent 
 
GCL 
GCL is an abbreviation for Graphics Command Language 
 
GCM 
GCM is an abbreviation for General Court Martial 
 
GCR 
GCR is an abbreviation for Group-Coded Recording (magnetic tape, 6250 
bpi) 
 
GCT 
GCT is an abbreviation for Greenwich Civil Time 
 
GCVS 
GCVS is an abbreviation for General Catalog of Variable Stars [Space] 
 
GDB 
GDB is an abbreviation for Gnu DeBugger 
 
GDP 
GDP is an abbreviation for Gross Domestic Product 
 
GDS 
GDS is an abbreviation for Great Dark Spot [Space] 
 
GE 
GE is an abbreviation for General Electric 
 
GEM 
GEM is an abbreviation for Giotto Extended Mission [Space] 
Graphics Environment Manager 
 
GEO 
GEO is an abbreviation for Geosynchronous Earth Orbit [Space] 
 
GHQ 
GHQ is an abbreviation for General HeadQuarters 
 
GHRS 
GHRS is an abbreviation for Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (on HST) 
[Space] 
 
GHz 
GHz is an abbreviation for Giga HertZ (unit of frequency, 1,000,000,000 
cycles per second) 
 
GI 
GI is an abbreviation for Galvanized Iron 
Gastro Intestinal (as in upper GI) 
General Issue 
Government Issue 
 
GID 
GID is an abbreviation for Group ID [UNIX] 
 
GIF 
GIF is an abbreviation for Graphics Interchange Format 
 
GIGO 
GIGO is an abbreviation for Garbage In Garbage Out 
 
GIN 
GIN is an abbreviation for Graphics INput 
 
GISS 
GISS is an abbreviation for Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
 
GKS 
GKS is an abbreviation for Graphical Kernel Standard 
Graphics Kernel System 
 
GM 
GM is an abbreviation for Game Master 
General Manager 
General Motors [Corporate name, Automobile] 
Guided Missile 
 
GMBH 
GMBH is an abbreviation for Gesellschaft Mit Beschraenkter Haftung 
 
GMC 
GMC is an abbreviation for Giant Molecular Cloud [Space] 
 
GMD 
GMD is an abbreviation for Gesellschaft f\:ur Mathematik und 
Datenverarbeitung (German Institute for Mathematics and Data Processing) 
 
GMRT 
GMRT is an abbreviation for Giant Meter-wave Radio Telescope [Space] 
 
GMT 
GMT is an abbreviation for Greenwich Mean Time (also called UT) 
 
GNP 
GNP is an abbreviation for Gross National Product 
 
GNU 
GNU is an abbreviation for GNU's Not Unix 
 
GOES 
GOES is an abbreviation for Geostationary Orbiting Environmental 
Satellite [Space] 
Geostationary Orbiting Environmental Satellites [Space] 
 
GOSIP 
GOSIP is an abbreviation for Government OSI Profile 
Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile (calls for government 
procurement of ISO/CCITT products) 
 
GP 
GP is an abbreviation for General Practitioner 
General Purpose (RR engines and origin of Jeep) [Railroading, Automobile] 
 
GPC 
GPC is an abbreviation for General Purpose Computer [Space] 
 
GPI 
GPI is an abbreviation for Graphics Programming Interface 
 
GPIB 
GPIB is an abbreviation for General Purpose Interface Bus 
General-Purpose Interface Bus 
 
GPL 
GPL is an abbreviation for GNU General Public Licence 
 
GPO 
GPO is an abbreviation for General Post Office 
Government Printing Office 
 
GPS 
GPS is an abbreviation for Global Positioning System 
Global Positioning System [Space] 
 
GQ 
GQ is an abbreviation for General Quarters 
 
GRB 
GRB is an abbreviation for Gamma Ray Burst(er) 
 
GREP 
GREP is an abbreviation for Global Regular Expression Print [UNIX] 
Global Regular Expression Print, g/re/p, (UNIX command) 
 
GRO 
GRO is an abbreviation for Gamma Ray Observatory [Space] 
 
GRS 
GRS is an abbreviation for Gamma Ray Spectrometer (on Mars Observer) 
[Space] 
Great Red Spot [Space] 
 
GS 
GS is an abbreviation for General Schedule 
Glide Slope 
 
GSA 
GSA is an abbreviation for General Services Administration 
General Services Adminstration [US Government] 
Girl Scouts of America 
 
GSBCA 
GSBCA is an abbreviation for General Services administration Board of 
Contract Appeals 
 
GSC 
GSC is an abbreviation for Guide Star Catalog (for HST) [Space] 
 
GSFC 
GSFC is an abbreviation for Goddard Space Flight Center (Greenbelt, MD) 
[NASA, Space] 
 
GSI 
GSI is an abbreviation for Gesellschaft f\:ur Schwerionenforschung 
(German Federal Research Institute for Heavy Ion Research) 
 
GSM 
GSM is an abbreviation for Global System Mobile 
Groupe Speciale Mobile (Committee Designing preceding) 
 
GSTS 
GSTS is an abbreviation for Ground-based Surveillance and Tracking System 
 
GT 
GT is an abbreviation for Gross Ton 
 
GTE 
GTE is an abbreviation for General Telephone and Electric [Corporate 
name] 
 
GTO 
GTO is an abbreviation for Geostationary Transfer Orbit [Space] 
 
GTSI 
GTSI is an abbreviation for Government Technology Services, inc. 
 
GUI 
GUI is an abbreviation for Graphical User Interface 
 
GW 
GW is an abbreviation for Gamma World 
 
GWEN 
GWEN is an abbreviation for Ground Wave Emergency Network 
 
GWM 
GWM is an abbreviation for Generic Window Manager [X] 
 
H 
H is an abbreviation for Harn 
Height 
 
HACD 
HACD is an abbreviation for Home Area Customer Dialing 
 
HAL 
HAL is an abbreviation for Heuristically programmed ALgorithmic computer 
(movie 2001) 
 
HAM 
HAM is an abbreviation for Hold And Modify 
 
HAO 
HAO is an abbreviation for High Altitude Observatory [Space] 
 
Hb 
Hb is an abbreviation for HemogloBin 
 
HBM 
HBM is an abbreviation for Her British Majesty; His British Majesty 
 
HBO 
HBO is an abbreviation for Home Box Office 
 
HC 
HC is an abbreviation for Holy Communion 
House of Commons 
 
HCFA 
HCFA is an abbreviation for Health Care Financing Administration 
 
HCFC 
HCFC is an abbreviation for hydrochlorofluorocarbon [Chemical] 
 
HCL 
HCL is an abbreviation for High Cost of Living 
 
HD 
HD is an abbreviation for Hard Disk 
Heavy Duty 
Henry Draper catalog entry [Space] 
 
HDA 
HDA is an abbreviation for Head Disk Assembly (in winchester disk drives) 
 
HDBV 
HDBV is an abbreviation for Host Data Base View 
 
HDL 
HDL is an abbreviation for High Density Lipoprotein 
 
HDLC 
HDLC is an abbreviation for High-level Data Link Control [Networking] 
 
HDTV 
HDTV is an abbreviation for High Definition Television 
 
HE 
HE is an abbreviation for His Eminence 
His Excellency 
 
HEAO 
HEAO is an abbreviation for High Energy Astronomical Observatory [Space] 
 
HEDM 
HEDM is an abbreviation for High Energy-Density Matter [Space] 
 
HEMP 
HEMP is an abbreviation for Help End Marijuana Prohibition 
 
HEO 
HEO is an abbreviation for High Earth Orbit [Space] 
 
HEPnet 
HEPnet is an abbreviation for High Energy Physics network [Networking] 
 
HERO 
HERO is an abbreviation for Hazards of Electromagnetic Radiation to 
Ordnance 
 
HF 
HF is an abbreviation for High Fantasy 
High Frequency (3-30MHz) 
 
HFE 
HFE is an abbreviation for Human Factors Engineering 
 
HFS 
HFS is an abbreviation for Hierarchical File System 
 
HGA 
HGA is an abbreviation for High Gain Antenna [Space] 
 
HHS 
HHS is an abbreviation for (US Department of) Health and Human Services 
 
HI 
HI is an abbreviation for Hawaii 
 
HIIPS 
HIIPS is an abbreviation for Hud Integrated Information Processing 
Services 
 
HLC 
HLC is an abbreviation for Heavy Lift Capability [Space] 
 
HLL 
HLL is an abbreviation for High-Level Language 
 
HLV 
HLV is an abbreviation for Heavy Lift Vehicle [Space] 
 
HMC 
HMC is an abbreviation for Halley Multicolor Camera (on Giotto) [Space] 
 
HMOS 
HMOS is an abbreviation for High performance Metal Oxide Semiconductor 
(see MOS) 
 
HMS 
HMS is an abbreviation for His/Her Majesty's Ship 
 
HMT 
HMT is an abbreviation for His/Her Majesty's Transport 
 
HNPA 
HNPA is an abbreviation for Home Numbering Plan Area [Telephony] 
 
HOBIS 
HOBIS is an abbreviation for HOtel Billing Information System 
 
HOL 
HOL is an abbreviation for High-Order System 
 
HOTOL 
HOTOL is an abbreviation for HOrizontal Take-Off and Landing 
 
HP 
HP is an abbreviation for Hewlett Packard, Inc. [Corporate name] 
High Pressure 
Higher Power (sort of an AA "in" term, usually God) 
Hit Points 
HorsePower 
 
HPGe 
HPGe is an abbreviation for High Purity Germanium 
 
HPL/T 
HPL/T is an abbreviation for High-Productivity Languages/Tools 
 
HQ 
HQ is an abbreviation for HeadQuarters 
 
HR 
HR is an abbreviation for Hertzsprung-Russell (diagram) [Space] 
House of Representatives 
 
HRH 
HRH is an abbreviation for Her Royal Highness 
His Royal Highness 
 
HRI 
HRI is an abbreviation for High Resolution Imager (on ROSAT) [Space] 
 
HS 
HS is an abbreviation for High School 
 
HSB 
HSB is an abbreviation for Hue, Saturation, Brightness 
 
HSP 
HSP is an abbreviation for High Speed Photometer (on HST) [Space] 
 
HST 
HST is an abbreviation for Hawaiian Standard Time 
Hubble Space Telescope [Space] 
 
HT 
HT is an abbreviation for High Tension (as in electric power 
transmission) 
 
HTK 
HTK is an abbreviation for Hits To Kill 
 
HUAC 
HUAC is an abbreviation for House Unamerican Activities Committee 
 
HUD 
HUD is an abbreviation for Heads Up Display 
Housing and Urban Development [US Government] 
 
HUPD 
HUPD is an abbreviation for Harvard University Police Department 
 
HUT 
HUT is an abbreviation for Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (ASTRO package) 
[Space] 
 
HV 
HV is an abbreviation for High Voltage 
 
HVAC 
HVAC is an abbreviation for Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
 
HW2000 
HW2000 is an abbreviation for Highway 2000 
 
HWM 
HWM is an abbreviation for High-Water Mark 
 
Hz 
Hz is an abbreviation for HertZ (unit of frequency, cycles per second) 
 
I/O 
I/O is an abbreviation for Input/Output 
 
IAB 
IAB is an abbreviation for Internet Activities Board [Networking] 
 
IAEA 
IAEA is an abbreviation for International Atomic Energy Agency 
 
IANA 
IANA is an abbreviation for Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
(IANA@ISI.EDU) 
 
IATA 
IATA is an abbreviation for International Air Transport Association 
 
IAU 
IAU is an abbreviation for International Astronomical Union [Space] 
 
IAUC 
IAUC is an abbreviation for IAU Circular [Space] 
 
IBM 
IBM is an abbreviation for Ingrained Batch Mentality 
International Business Machines, Inc. [Corporate name] 
Itty Bitty Machines 
 
IBT 
IBT is an abbreviation for Illinois Bell Telephone 
 
IC 
IC is an abbreviation for Integrated Circuit 
Interexchange Carrier [Telephony] (see also IEC, IXC) 
 
ICB 
ICB is an abbreviation for Interstate Computer Bank 
 
ICBM 
ICBM is an abbreviation for InterContinental Ballistic Missile 
 
ICE 
ICE is an abbreviation for In-Circuit Emulator 
International Cometary Explorer [Space] 
 
ICI 
ICI is an abbreviation for Imperial Chemical Industries 
 
ICJ 
ICJ is an abbreviation for International Court of Justice 
 
ICL 
ICL is an abbreviation for International Computers Ltd. 
 
ICMP 
ICMP is an abbreviation for Internet Control Message Protocol 
 
ICP 
ICP is an abbreviation for Integrated Channel Processor 
Inventory Control Points 
 
ICRC 
ICRC is an abbreviation for International Cosmic Ray Conference 
 
ID 
ID is an abbreviation for IDentification 
Idaho 
 
IDA 
IDA is an abbreviation for Intercommunication Data Areas 
International Dark-sky Association [Space] 
International Development Association 
 
IDDD 
IDDD is an abbreviation for International Direct Distance Dial 
[Telephony] 
 
IDE 
IDE is an abbreviation for Interactive Development Environments, inc 
 
IDF 
IDF is an abbreviation for Intermediate Distributing Frame [Telephony] 
 
IDL 
IDL is an abbreviation for Interactive Data Language [Space] 
 
IDV 
IDV is an abbreviation for Interlibrational Derived Vehicle [Space] 
 
IE 
IE is an abbreviation for Indo-European 
 
IEC 
IEC is an abbreviation for Inter-Exchange Carrier [Telephony] (see also 
IC, IXC) 
 
IEE 
IEE is an abbreviation for Institute of Electrical Engineers [UK] 
 
IEEE 
IEEE is an abbreviation for Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers 
 
IETF 
IETF is an abbreviation for Internet Engineering Task Force 
 
IF 
IF is an abbreviation for Intermediate Frequency (as in IF stage) 
 
IFB 
IFB is an abbreviation for Invitation For Bids 
 
IFC 
IFC is an abbreviation for International Finance Corporation 
International Freighting Corporation 
 
IFF 
IFF is an abbreviation for Identification - Friend or Foe 
Interchange File Format 
 
IFLA 
IFLA is an abbreviation for International Federation of Library 
Associations 
 
IFR 
IFR is an abbreviation for Instrument Flight Rules [Aviation] 
 
IGES 
IGES is an abbreviation for Initial Graphics Exchange Standard 
 
IGM 
IGM is an abbreviation for InterGalactic Medium [Space] 
 
IGY 
IGY is an abbreviation for International Geophysical Year 
International Geophysical Year [Space] 
 
IHP 
IHP is an abbreviation for Indicated HorsePower 
 
IHS 
IHS is an abbreviation for Integrated Hospital Support 
 
IIA 
IIA is an abbreviation for Information Industry Association 
 
IIE 
IIE is an abbreviation for Institute of Industrial Engineers 
 
IIHF 
IIHF is an abbreviation for International Ice Hockey Federation 
 
IIL 
IIL is an abbreviation for Integrated Injection Logic 
 
ILO 
ILO is an abbreviation for International Labor Organization 
 
ILS 
ILS is an abbreviation for Instrument Landing System 
 
ILV 
ILV is an abbreviation for Industrial Launch Vehicle [Space] 
 
IMF 
IMF is an abbreviation for International Monetary Fund 
 
IMHO 
IMHO is an abbreviation for In My Humble Opinion [Net jargon] 
 
IMO 
IMO is a computer jargon abbreviation for In My Opinion 
 
IMP 
IMP is an abbreviation for Interface Message Processor (replaced by PSN) 
 
IMSL 
IMSL is an abbreviation for International Mathematical Subroutine Library 
 
IN 
IN is an abbreviation for Indiana 
 
INADS 
INADS is an abbreviation for INitialization and ADministration System 
[Telephony] 
 
INRA 
INRA is an abbreviation for Iesus Nazerenus Rex Iudaeorum (Jesus of 
Nazareth, King of the Jews) 
 
INRIA 
INRIA is an abbreviation for Institut National de Recherche en 
Informatique et Automatique 
 
INS 
INS is an abbreviation for Immigration and Naturalization Service 
 
INSTITUTE 
INSTITUTE is an abbreviation for INSTITUTE's Name Shows That It's Totally 
Unrelated To EMACS 
 
INTAP 
INTAP is an abbreviation for INteroperability Technology Association for 
information Processing 
 
INWATS 
INWATS is an abbreviation for INward Wide Area Telephone Service 
[Telephony] 
 
IO 
IO is an abbreviation for Input/Output (sometimes I/O) 
 
IOC 
IOC is an abbreviation for International Operating Center [Telephony, US] 
 
IOD 
IOD is an abbreviation for Identified Outward Dialing 
 
IOOF 
IOOF is an abbreviation for International Order of Odd Fellows 
 
IOTA 
IOTA is an abbreviation for Infrared-Optical Telescope Array [Space] 
International Occultation Timing Association [Space] 
 
IOU 
IOU is an abbreviation for I Owe you(U) 
 
IP 
IP is an abbreviation for Information Provider [Telephony] 
Innings Pitched 
Intermediate Point 
Internet Protocol 
 
IPC 
IPC is an abbreviation for Inter-Process Communication 
 
IPE 
IPE is an abbreviation for Integrated Programming Environment 
 
IPMS 
IPMS is an abbreviation for InterPersonal Message Services 
 
IPS 
IPS is an abbreviation for Inertial Pointing System [Space] 
Information Processing Standards 
 
IPSE 
IPSE is an abbreviation for Integrated Project-Support Environment 
 
IQ 
IQ is an abbreviation for Intelligence Quotient (see EQ) 
 
IR 
IR is an abbreviation for Index Register 
Infra-Red 
 
IRA 
IRA is an abbreviation for Individual Retirement Account 
Irish Republican Army 
 
IRAF 
IRAF is an abbreviation for Image Reduction and Analysis Facility [Space] 
 
IRAS 
IRAS is an abbreviation for InfraRed Astronomical Satellite [Space] 
 
IRBM 
IRBM is an abbreviation for Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile 
 
IRDS 
IRDS is an abbreviation for Information Resource Dictionary Standard 
InfraRed Detection Set 
 
IRE 
IRE is an abbreviation for Institute of Radio Engineers (old name for the 
now IEEE, which see) 
 
IRM 
IRM is an abbreviation for Information Resources Management 
 
IRMS 
IRMS is an abbreviation for Information Resources Management Service 
 
IRS 
IRS is an abbreviation for Internal Revenue Service 
 
IRTF 
IRTF is an abbreviation for Internet Research Task Force 
 
IS 
IS is an abbreviation for Information Systems 
International Standard [ISO] (Beyond the DIS Stage) 
 
ISA 
ISA is an abbreviation for Industry-Standard Architecture 
 
ISAM 
ISAM is an abbreviation for Indexed Sequential Access Method 
 
ISAS 
ISAS is an abbreviation for Institute of Space and Astronautical Science 
(Japan) [Space] 
 
ISBD 
ISBD is an abbreviation for International Bibliographic Description 
 
ISC 
ISC is an abbreviation for Information Services Center 
International Switching Center 
 
ISCH 
ISCH is an abbreviation for Interstitial-Cell-Stimulating Hormone (same 
as LH) 
 
ISDN 
ISDN is an abbreviation for Integrated Services Digital Network 
[Telephony] 
 
ISDT 
ISDT is an abbreviation for Integrated Systems Development Tool 
 
ISEE 
ISEE is an abbreviation for International Sun Earth Explorer (usually 
ISEE-3) 
 
ISF 
ISF is an abbreviation for Information Systems Factory 
 
ISFUG 
ISFUG is an abbreviation for Integrated Software Federal User Group 
 
ISI 
ISI is an abbreviation for Information Sciences Institute 
 
ISM 
ISM is an abbreviation for InterStellar Medium [Space] 
 
ISO 
ISO is an abbreviation for Infrared Space Observatory [Space] 
International Organization for Standardization  
International Standards Organization [Space] 
 
ISODE 
ISODE is an abbreviation for ISO Development Environment 
 
ISOO 
ISOO is an abbreviation for Information Security Oversight Office 
 
ISPM 
ISPM is an abbreviation for International Solar Polar Mission 
International Solar Polar Mission (now Ulysses) [Space] 
 
ISR 
ISR is an abbreviation for Institute of Snow Research 
 
ISRG 
ISRG is an abbreviation for Independent Space Research Group 
 
ISV 
ISV is an abbreviation for Independent Software Vendor 
 
ISY 
ISY is an abbreviation for International Space Year [Space] 
 
IT 
IT is an abbreviation for Industrial Technology 
Information Technology 
 
ITC 
ITC is an abbreviation for Inter-Task Communication 
 
ITS 
ITS is an abbreviation for Incompatible Timesharing System 
 
ITT 
ITT is an abbreviation for International Telephone and Telegraph 
 
ITU 
ITU is an abbreviation for International Telecommunications Union 
 
ITUSA 
ITUSA is an abbreviation for IT Users Standards Association 
 
IUE 
IUE is an abbreviation for International Ultraviolet Explorer [Space] 
 
IUS 
IUS is an abbreviation for Inertial Upper Stage 
Inertial Upper Stage [Space] 
 
IUV 
IUV is an abbreviation for Interlibrational Utility Vehicle [Space] 
 
IXC 
IXC is an abbreviation for Inter-eXchange Carrier [Telephony] (see also 
IC, IEC) 
 
IXI 
IXI is an abbreviation for International (pan-European) X.25 
Infrastructure 
 
JACM 
JACM is an abbreviation for Journal of the Association for Computing 
Machinery 
 
JANET 
JANET is an abbreviation for Joint Academic Network (UK) 
 
JBS 
JBS is an abbreviation for John Birch Society 
 
JC 
JC is an abbreviation for Jesus Christ 
Joint Compound (plumbing) 
Julius Caesar 
Junior College 
 
JCA 
JCA is an abbreviation for Jewelry Crafts Association 
 
JCAC 
JCAC is an abbreviation for Joint Civil Affairs Committee 
 
JCAE 
JCAE is an abbreviation for Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 
 
JCEE 
JCEE is an abbreviation for Joint Council on Economic Education 
 
JCET 
JCET is an abbreviation for Joint Council on Educational Television 
 
JCS 
JCS is an abbreviation for Joint Chiefs of Staff 
 
JD 
JD is an abbreviation for Justice Department 
 
JDS 
JDS is an abbreviation for John Dewey Society 
 
JEM 
JEM is an abbreviation for Japanese Experiment Module (for SSF) [Space] 
 
JES 
JES is an abbreviation for John Ericsson Society 
 
JET 
JET is an abbreviation for Joint European Torus (fusion research) 
 
JFK 
JFK is an abbreviation for John F. Kennedy 
John F. Kennedy (international airport) 
 
JFMIP 
JFMIP is an abbreviation for Joint Financial Management Improvement 
Program 
 
JGR 
JGR is an abbreviation for Journal of Geophysical Research 
Journal of Geophysical Research [Space] 
 
JI 
JI is an abbreviation for Justice, Inc. 
 
JIC 
JIC is an abbreviation for Joint Intelligence Center 
Just in Case 
 
JILA 
JILA is an abbreviation for Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics 
[Space] 
 
JIM 
JIM is an abbreviation for Job Information Memorandum 
 
JINTACCS 
JINTACCS is an abbreviation for Joint INteroperability of TActical 
Command and Control Systems 
 
JIS 
JIS is an abbreviation for Japan Industrial Standards 
 
JISC 
JISC is an abbreviation for Japanese Industrial Standards Committee 
 
JIT 
JIT is an abbreviation for Just In Time 
 
JMS 
JMS is an abbreviation for John Milton Society 
 
JNT 
JNT is an abbreviation for Joint Network Team (UK) 
 
JO 
JO is an abbreviation for Job Order 
Junior Officer 
 
JOVE 
JOVE is an abbreviation for Jonathan's Own Version of Emacs 
 
JOVIAL 
JOVIAL is an abbreviation for Jules Own Version of the International 
Algorithmic Language 
 
JPL 
JPL is an abbreviation for Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory [Space] 
 
JRC 
JRC is an abbreviation for Junior Red Cross 
 
JSC 
JSC is an abbreviation for Johnson Space Center 
Johnson Space Center (NASA) [Space] 
 
JSD 
JSD is an abbreviation for Jackson System Development 
 
JSRC 
JSRC is an abbreviation for Joint Services Review Committee 
 
JTIDS 
JTIDS is an abbreviation for Joint Tactical Information Distribution 
Systems 
 
JV 
JV is an abbreviation for Junior Varsity 
 
JvNC 
JvNC is an abbreviation for John von Neumann (Super Computer) Center 
 
JvNCnet 
JvNCnet is an abbreviation for John von Neumann (Super Computer) Center 
network 
 
K 
K is an abbreviation for Kilo- (metric 1000) 
 
K&R 
K&R is an abbreviation for Kernighan and Ritchie, the c programming 
language 
 
K9 
K9 is an abbreviation for canine (K9 corps - army dogs) 
 
KAIST 
KAIST is an abbreviation for Korean Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology 
 
KAO 
KAO is an abbreviation for Kuiper Airborne Observatory [Space] 
 
KB 
KB is an abbreviation for KiloByte 
 
KC 
KC is an abbreviation for King's Counsel (QC when queen reigning) 
Knights of Columbus 
 
KD 
KD is an abbreviation for Kiln Dried 
Knocked Down 
 
KDCI 
KDCI is an abbreviation for Key Display Call Indicator 
 
KERMIT 
KERMIT is an abbreviation for Kl-10 Error-free Reciprocal Micro 
Interconnect over Tty lines 
 
KET 
KET is an abbreviation for Kentucky Educational Television 
 
KHz 
KHz is an abbreviation for Kilo HertZ (unit of frequency, 1000 cycles per 
second) 
 
KI 
KI is an abbreviation for Kiwanis International 
 
KIA 
KIA is an abbreviation for Killed In Action 
 
KIAS 
KIAS is an abbreviation for Knot Indicated Air Speed 
 
Km 
Km is an abbreviation for Kilometers 
 
KO 
KO is an abbreviation for Knock Out [Boxing, Electric] 
 
KP 
KP is an abbreviation for Key Pulse [Telephony] 
Kitchen Police 
 
KPNO 
KPNO is an abbreviation for Kitt Peak National Observatory 
 
KPO 
KPO is an abbreviation for KeyPunch Operator 
 
KQC 
KQC is an abbreviation for King's College London 
 
KS 
KS is an abbreviation for King's Scholar 
 
KSC 
KSC is an abbreviation for Kennedy Space Center (NASA) [Space] 
 
KSU 
KSU is an abbreviation for Key System Unit [Telephony] 
 
KTB 
KTB is an abbreviation for Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary (from German) 
[Space] 
 
KTS 
KTS is an abbreviation for Key Telephone System [Telephony] 
 
KTU 
KTU is an abbreviation for Key Telephone Unit [Telephony] 
 
KWIC 
KWIC is an abbreviation for Key Word In Context 
 
KY 
KY is an abbreviation for Kentucky 
 
L1 
L1 is an abbreviation for Lagrange Point #1 35,000 Miles above moon 
[Space] 
 
L2 
L2 is an abbreviation for Lagrange Point #2 40,000 Miles behind moon 
[Space] 
 
L3 
L3 is an abbreviation for Lagrange Point #3 (?? 35,000 Miles below moon) 
[Space] 
 
L4 
L4 is an abbreviation for Lagrange Point #4 240,000 mile Earth orbit 
[Space] 
 
L5 
L5 is an abbreviation for Lagrange Point #5 240,000 mile Earth orbit 
[Space] 
 
LA 
LA is an abbreviation for Los Angeles 
Louisiana 
Low Altitude 
 
LADAR 
LADAR is an abbreviation for LAser Detection And Ranging 
 
LAM 
LAM is an abbreviation for Master of Liberal Arts 
 
LAMA 
LAMA is an abbreviation for Local Automatic Message Accounting 
[Telephony] 
 
LAN 
LAN is an abbreviation for Local Apparent Noon 
Local Area Network 
 
LANL 
LANL is an abbreviation for Los Alamos (NM) National Laboratory 
Los Alamos National Laboratory [Space] 
 
LAPB 
LAPB is an abbreviation for Link Access Procedure (Balanced) 
 
LAPD 
LAPD is an abbreviation for Link Access Procedure (??) 
Los Angeles (CA, US) Police Department 
 
LAR 
LAR is an abbreviation for Local Acquisition Radar 
 
LaRC 
LaRC is an abbreviation for Langley Research Center (NASA) [Space] 
 
LASER 
LASER is an abbreviation for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission 
of Radiation 
 
LAT 
LAT is an abbreviation for Local Apparent Time 
 
LATA 
LATA is an abbreviation for Local Access and Transport Area [Telephony] 
 
LAX 
LAX is an abbreviation for Los Angeles International Airport 
 
LB 
LB is an abbreviation for Light Bomber 
pound (LiBra) 
 
LBHS 
LBHS is an abbreviation for Long Beach High School 
 
LBL 
LBL is an abbreviation for Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) Labs 
 
LBS 
LBS is an abbreviation for Pounds 
 
LC 
LC is an abbreviation for inductor-Capacitor circuit (as in filters, L is 
symbol inductance) 
 
LCD 
LCD is an abbreviation for Liquid Crystal Display 
Lowest Common Denominator 
 
LCDR 
LCDR is an abbreviation for Lieutenant Commander 
 
LCL 
LCL is an abbreviation for Less than Carload Lot [Railroading] 
Lunar Cargo Lander [NASA OEXP] 
 
LCM 
LCM is an abbreviation for Least Common Multiple 
Life Cycle Management 
 
LCS 
LCS is an abbreviation for Laboratory for Computer Science (of MIT) 
 
LCT 
LCT is an abbreviation for Landing Craft Tanks 
 
LD 
LD is an abbreviation for Long Distance [Telephony] 
 
LDC 
LDC is an abbreviation for Long Distance Carrier [Telephony] 
 
LDEF 
LDEF is an abbreviation for Long Duration Exposure Facility [Space, NASA] 
 
LDF 
LDF is an abbreviation for Large Deployable Reflector [Space] 
 
LDL 
LDL is an abbreviation for Low Density Lipoprotein 
 
LDX 
LDX is an abbreviation for Long Distance eXtender [Telephony] 
 
LEAP 
LEAP is an abbreviation for Low-power Enhanced At Portable 
 
LEC 
LEC is an abbreviation for Local Exchange Carrier [Telephony] 
 
LED 
LED is an abbreviation for Light Emitting Diode 
 
LEM 
LEM is an abbreviation for Lunar Excursion Module (a.k.a. LM) (Apollo 
spacecraft) [Space] 
 
LEO 
LEO is an abbreviation for Low Earth Orbit [Space] 
 
LEP 
LEP is an abbreviation for Large Electron-Positron collider [CERN] 
 
LeRC 
LeRC is an abbreviation for Lewis Research Center (NASA) [Space] 
 
LEST 
LEST is an abbreviation for Large Earth-based Solar Telescope [Space] 
 
LF 
LF is an abbreviation for Low Frequency (30-300KHz) 
 
LFSA 
LFSA is an abbreviation for List of Frequently Seen Acronyms (!) [Space] 
 
LGA 
LGA is an abbreviation for Low Gain Antenna [Space] 
 
LGM 
LGM is an abbreviation for Little Green Men [Space] 
 
LH 
LH is an abbreviation for Left Hand 
Liquid Hydrogen (also LH2 or LHX) [Space] 
Lower Half 
Luteinizing Hormone (same as ISCH) 
 
LHC 
LHC is an abbreviation for Large Hadron Collider [CERN] 
 
LHD 
LHD is an abbreviation for Litterarum Humaniorum Doctor (doctor of human 
letters) 
 
LHS 
LHS is an abbreviation for Left Hand Side 
 
LI 
LI is an abbreviation for Long Island 
 
LIFIA 
LIFIA is an abbreviation for Laboratoire d'Informatique Fondamentale et 
d'Intelligence Artificielle 
 
LIFO 
LIFO is an abbreviation for Last In First Out (see FIFO) 
 
LINC 
LINC is an abbreviation for Laboratory INstrument Computer 
 
LISA 
LISA is an abbreviation for Large Installation Systems Administration 
(USENIX specific?) 
 
LISP 
LISP is an abbreviation for LISt Processing Language 
 
LIU 
LIU is an abbreviation for Line Interface Unit 
 
LL 
LL is an abbreviation for Late Latin 
Long Lines [Telephony] 
 
LLB 
LLB is an abbreviation for Legum Baccalaureus (bachelor of laws) 
 
LLD 
LLD is an abbreviation for Legum doctor (doctor of laws) 
 
LLN 
LLN is an abbreviation for Line Link Network [Telephony] 
 
LLNL 
LLNL is an abbreviation for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories 
 
LLO 
LLO is an abbreviation for Low Lunar Orbit [Space] 
 
LLOX 
LLOX is an abbreviation for Lunar Liquid Oxygen [Space] 
 
LLP 
LLP is an abbreviation for Line Link Pulsing [Telephony] 
 
LM 
LM is an abbreviation for Life Master (Contract Bridge ranking) 
Lunar Module (a.k.a. LEM) (Apollo spacecraft) [Space] 
 
LMC 
LMC is an abbreviation for Large Magellanic Cloud (see SMC) 
Large Magellanic Cloud [Space] 
 
LMOS 
LMOS is an abbreviation for Line Maintenance Operations System 
[Telephony, AT&T] 
 
LN2 
LN2 is an abbreviation for Liquid N2 (Nitrogen) [Space] 
 
LNG 
LNG is an abbreviation for Liquified Natural Gas 
 
LOA 
LOA is an abbreviation for Lands of Adventure 
 
LOFT 
LOFT is an abbreviation for Launch Operations Flight Test [Space] 
 
LOOPS 
LOOPS is an abbreviation for Lisp Object Oriented Programming System 
 
LOP 
LOP is an abbreviation for Lines Of Position 
 
LOSF 
LOSF is an abbreviation for Lunar Orbit Staging Facility [Space] 
 
LOTS 
LOTS is an abbreviation for Low Overhead Timesharing System 
 
LOX 
LOX is an abbreviation for Liquid OXygen [Space] 
Liquid Oxygen 
 
LP 
LP is an abbreviation for Long Play(ing) (record) 
Low Pressure 
 
LPC 
LPC is an abbreviation for Linear Predictive Coding (speech processing) 
 
LPDA 
LPDA is an abbreviation for Link Problem Determination Aid 
 
LPF 
LPF is an abbreviation for League for Programming Freedom 
 
LPG 
LPG is an abbreviation for Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
Low Pressure Gas 
 
LPL 
LPL is an abbreviation for Lunar Personnel Lander [NASA OEXP] 
 
LPN 
LPN is an abbreviation for Licensed Practical Nurse 
 
LPP 
LPP is an abbreviation for Licensed Program Products 
 
LPR 
LPR is an abbreviation for Line PrinteR 
 
LPT 
LPT is an abbreviation for Lunar Propellant Tanker [NASA OEXP] 
 
LPV 
LPV is an abbreviation for Lunar Piloted Vehicle [NASA OEXP] 
 
LRB 
LRB is an abbreviation for Liquid Rocket Booster [Space] 
 
LRBM 
LRBM is an abbreviation for Long Range Ballistic Missile 
 
LRC 
LRC is an abbreviation for Longitudinal Redundancy Character 
 
LRU 
LRU is an abbreviation for Least Recently Used 
Line Replaceable Unit 
 
LRV 
LRV is an abbreviation for Light Rail Vehicle [Railroading] 
 
LS 
LS is an abbreviation for Left Side 
Letter Signed 
Locus Sigilli (place of seal) 
 
LSAP 
LSAP is an abbreviation for Logical(?, maybe Link) Service Access Point 
[OSI, Networking] 
 
LSB 
LSB is an abbreviation for Least Significant Bit; Least Significant Byte 
Lower Side Band 
 
LSC 
LSC is an abbreviation for Lecture Series Committee (of MIT) 
LightSpeed C 
 
LSD 
LSD is an abbreviation for Least Significant Digit 
LySergic acid Diethylamide 
pounds (Libra), shillings (Sestertii), and (old) pence (Denarii) 
 
LSI 
LSI is an abbreviation for Large Scale Integration 
 
LSP 
LSP is an abbreviation for LightSpeed Pascal 
 
LSR 
LSR is an abbreviation for Local Standard of Rest [Space] 
 
LSS 
LSS is an abbreviation for Life Support System 
Loop Switching System 
 
LSSD 
LSSD is an abbreviation for Level-Sensitive Scan Detection 
 
LT 
LT is an abbreviation for Long Ton 
Low Tension 
 
LTC 
LTC is an abbreviation for Lieutenant Colonel 
 
LTJG 
LTJG is an abbreviation for Lieutenant Junior Grade 
 
LTL 
LTL is an abbreviation for Less than Truckload Lot 
 
LTP 
LTP is an abbreviation for Lunar Transient Phenomenon [Space] 
 
LUG 
LUG is an abbreviation for Local Users Group 
 
LUT 
LUT is an abbreviation for Look-Up Table 
 
LWM 
LWM is an abbreviation for Low-Water Mark 
 
LWT 
LWT is an abbreviation for London Weekend Television [Corporate name] 
 
LZ 
LZ is an abbreviation for Landing Zone 
 
M 
M is an abbreviation for Mega- (metric 10^6) 
Miniatures 
 
m 
m is an abbreviation for meter(s) 
milli- (metric 1/1000) 
 
MA 
MA is an abbreviation for Massachusetts [US state postal designation] 
 
MAAP 
MAAP is an abbreviation for Maintenance And Administration Panel 
 
MAC 
MAC is an abbreviation for Media Access Control 
Medium Access Control 
Military Air Command 
an MIT interdepartmental lab (stands for many things) (renamed to LCS) 
 
MACSYMA 
MACSYMA is an abbreviation for project MAC's SYmbolic MAnipulation System 
 
MAD 
MAD is an abbreviation for Mutual Assured Destruction 
 
MADD 
MADD is an abbreviation for Mothers Against Drunk Driving 
 
MAG 
MAG is an abbreviation for Magazine 
 
MAN 
MAN is an abbreviation for Metropolitan Area Network 
 
MAP 
MAP is an abbreviation for Manufacturing Automation Protocol 
 
MAP/TOP 
MAP/TOP is an abbreviation for Manufacturing Automation 
Protocol/Technical Office Protocol 
 
MARBI 
MARBI is an abbreviation for MAchine Readable form of Bibliographic 
Information 
 
MARC 
MARC is an abbreviation for MAchine Readable card Catalog 
 
MARS 
MARS is an abbreviation for Multiuser Archival and Retrieval System 
 
MASC 
MASC is an abbreviation for Multiple Award Schedule Contract 
 
MASER 
MASER is an abbreviation for Microwave Amplification by Stimulated 
Emission of Radiation 
 
MASH 
MASH is an abbreviation for Mobile Army Surgical Hospital 
 
MAST 
MAST is an abbreviation for Multi-Application SOnar Trainer 
 
MAT-CALS 
MAT-CALS is an abbreviation for Marine Air Traffic-Control And Landing 
System 
 
MAU 
MAU is an abbreviation for Math Acceleration Unit 
Media Access Unit 
Medium Access Unit 
 
MB 
MB is an abbreviation for Manned Base [Space] 
MegaByte 
 
MBA 
MBA is an abbreviation for Master Business Administration 
 
MBTA 
MBTA is an abbreviation for Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 
 
MC 
MC is an abbreviation for Master of Ceremonies 
 
MCA 
MCA is an abbreviation for Micro Channel Architecture 
 
MCAE 
MCAE is an abbreviation for Mechanical Computer Aided Engineering 
 
MCC 
MCC is an abbreviation for Master Control Console 
Microelectronics and Computer technology Corporation 
Mission Control Center [Space] 
 
MCP 
MCP is an abbreviation for Master Control Program 
 
MCP/AS 
MCP/AS is an abbreviation for Master Control Program/Advanced System 
 
MCPO 
MCPO is an abbreviation for Master Chief Petty Officer 
 
MCSV 
MCSV is an abbreviation for Mars Crew Sortie Vehicle [NASA OEXP] 
 
MD 
MD is an abbreviation for Doctor of Medicine 
Maryland 
Maryland [US state postal designation] 
Medical Doctor 
Months after Date 
 
MDAS 
MDAS is an abbreviation for Magnetic Drum Auxiliary Sender 
 
MDC 
MDC is an abbreviation for Metropolitan District Commision (Mass State 
Agency) 
 
MDE 
MDE is an abbreviation for Modular Design Environment 
 
MDF 
MDF is an abbreviation for Main Distribution Frame [Telephony] 
 
MDRE 
MDRE is an abbreviation for Mass Driver Reaction Engine [Space] 
 
MDT 
MDT is an abbreviation for Mean Down Time 
 
ME 
ME is an abbreviation for Maine 
Mechanical Engineer 
 
MECO 
MECO is an abbreviation for Main Engine CutOff [Space, Shuttle] 
 
MEd 
MEd is an abbreviation for Master of EDucation 
 
MERP 
MERP is an abbreviation for Middle-Earth Role Playing 
 
MeV 
MeV is an abbreviation for Million Electron Volts 
 
MF 
MF is an abbreviation for Medium Frequency (300-3000KHz) 
Middle French 
Multi-Frequency [Telephony] 
 
MFA 
MFA is an abbreviation for Master Fine Arts 
Museum of Fine Arts [Boston] 
 
MFJ 
MFJ is an abbreviation for Modified Final Judgment [Telephony] 
 
MFLOPS 
MFLOPS is an abbreviation for Million FLoating-point OPerations per 
Second (see also FLOPS) 
 
MFM 
MFM is an abbreviation for Modified Frequency Modulation 
 
MFS 
MFS is an abbreviation for Macintosh File System 
 
MG 
MG is an abbreviation for Machine Gun 
Major General 
Military Government 
 
MGH 
MGH is an abbreviation for Massachusetts General Hospital 
 
MGM 
MGM is an abbreviation for Metro-Goldwyn Mayer [Corporate name] 
 
MHD 
MHD is an abbreviation for MagnetoHydroDynamics 
 
MHS 
MHS is an abbreviation for Mail Handling System [ISO] 
 
MHz 
MHz is an abbreviation for Mega HertZ (unit of frequency, 1,000,000 
cycles per second) 
 
MI 
MI is an abbreviation for Michigan 
Military Intelligence 
 
MIA 
MIA is an abbreviation for Missing In Action 
 
MIB 
MIB is an abbreviation for Management Information Base 
 
MIDI 
MIDI is an abbreviation for Musical Instrument Digital Interface 
 
MIFASS 
MIFASS is an abbreviation for Marine Integrated Fire And Support System 
 
MILNET 
MILNET is an abbreviation for MILitary NETwork 
 
MIM 
MIM is an abbreviation for Morality In Media 
 
MIMD 
MIMD is an abbreviation for Multiple Instruction, Multiple Data 
 
MINCE 
MINCE is an abbreviation for MINCE Is Not Complete Emacs 
 
MIPS 
MIPS is an abbreviation for Million Instructions Per Second 
 
Mir 
Mir is an abbreviation for Peace [Russian] 
 
MIRV 
MIRV is an abbreviation for Multiple Independently-Targetable Reentry 
Vehicle 
 
MIS 
MIS is an abbreviation for Management Information System 
 
MIT 
MIT is an abbreviation for Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 
ML 
ML is an abbreviation for Middle Latin 
 
mL 
mL is an abbreviation for milliliter(s) 
 
MLA 
MLA is an abbreviation for Member of Legislative Assembly (see MPP) 
 
MLD 
MLD is an abbreviation for Minimum Lethal Dose 
 
MLL 
MLL is an abbreviation for Mars Logistics Lander [NASA OEXP] 
 
MLS 
MLS is an abbreviation for Microwave Landing System 
Multi-Level Security 
 
MLV 
MLV is an abbreviation for Medium Lift Vehicle [NASA OEXP] 
 
MM 
MM is an abbreviation for Maryknoll Missioners 
 
mm 
mm is an abbreviation for millimeters 
 
MMES 
MMES is an abbreviation for Martin Marietta Energy Systems 
 
MMFS 
MMFS is an abbreviation for Manufacturing Message Format Standard 
 
MMH 
MMH is an abbreviation for MonoMethyl Hydrazine [Space] 
 
MMM 
MMM is an abbreviation for see 3M 
 
MMT 
MMT is an abbreviation for Multiple Mirror Telescope [Space] 
 
MMU 
MMU is an abbreviation for Manned Maneuvering Unit [Space] 
Memory Management Unit 
 
MMW 
MMW is an abbreviation for Multi-Mega Watt [Space] 
 
MN 
MN is an abbreviation for Minnesota 
 
MNA 
MNA is an abbreviation for Member of National Assembly (Quebec) 
 
MNP 
MNP is an abbreviation for Microcom Networking Protocol [Corporate name] 
 
MNRAS 
MNRAS is an abbreviation for Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society [Space] 
 
MO 
MO is an abbreviation for Mail Order 
Medical Officer 
Missouri 
Modus Operandi 
Money Order 
 
MOC 
MOC is an abbreviation for Mars Observer Camera (on Mars Observer) 
[Space] 
 
MOD 
MOD is an abbreviation for Ministry of Defence (UK) (sometimes written 
MoD) 
 
MOL 
MOL is an abbreviation for Manned Orbiting Laboratory [Space] 
 
MOLA 
MOLA is an abbreviation for Mars Observer Laser Altimeter (on Mars 
Observer) [Space] 
 
MOMA 
MOMA is an abbreviation for Museum of Modern Art [New York] 
 
MOMV 
MOMV is an abbreviation for Manned Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle [Space] 
 
MOR 
MOR is an abbreviation for Middle-Of-the-Road 
 
MOS 
MOS is an abbreviation for Metal Oxide Semiconductor 
 
MOSFET 
MOSFET is an abbreviation for Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect 
Transistor 
 
MOTAS 
MOTAS is an abbreviation for Member Of The Appropriate Sex 
 
MOTIS 
MOTIS is an abbreviation for Member Of The Inappropriate Sex 
Message-Oriented Text Interchange System 
 
MOTOS 
MOTOS is an abbreviation for Member of the Opposite Sex 
 
MOTSS 
MOTSS is an abbreviation for Member of the Same Sex 
 
MOTV 
MOTV is an abbreviation for Manned Orbital Transfer Vehicle [Space] 
 
MOU 
MOU is an abbreviation for Memorandum Of Understanding 
 
MOUSE 
MOUSE is an abbreviation for Minimum Orbital Unmanned Satellite of Earth 
 
MP 
MP is an abbreviation for Melting Point 
Member of Parliament 
Metropolitan Police 
Military Police(man) 
 
MPC 
MPC is an abbreviation for Minor Planets Circular [Space] 
 
MPE 
MPE is an abbreviation for Mission to Planet Earth [Space] 
 
MPG 
MPG is an abbreviation for Miles Per Gallon 
 
MPH 
MPH is an abbreviation for Miles Per Hour 
 
MPP 
MPP is an abbreviation for Member of Provincial Parliament (Canada; also 
MLA) 
 
MPR 
MPR is an abbreviation for Mars Pressurized Rover [Space] 
 
MPV 
MPV is an abbreviation for Mars Piloted Vehicle [NASA OEXP] 
 
MPW 
MPW is an abbreviation for Macintosh Programmer's Workshop 
 
MR 
MR is an abbreviation for Miniatures Rules 
 
MRI 
MRI is an abbreviation for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
MRP 
MRP is an abbreviation for Manufacturing Requirements Planning 
 
MRSR 
MRSR is an abbreviation for Mars Rover and Sample Return [Space] 
 
MRSRM 
MRSRM is an abbreviation for Mars Rover and Sample Return Mission [Space] 
 
MS 
MS is an abbreviation for ManuScript 
Master of Science 
Military Science 
Motor Ship 
Multiple Sclerosis 
 
MS-DOS 
MS-DOS is an abbreviation for MicroSoft DOS 
 
MSB 
MSB is an abbreviation for Most Significant Bit; Most Significant Byte 
 
MSC 
MSC is an abbreviation for MicroSoft C 
 
MSCP 
MSCP is an abbreviation for Mass Storage Control Protocol 
 
MSD 
MSD is an abbreviation for Most Significant Digit 
 
MSE 
MSE is an abbreviation for Mobile Subscriber Equipment 
 
MSFC 
MSFC is an abbreviation for (George C.) Marshall Space Flight Center 
(NASA) [Space] 
Marshall Space Flight Center 
 
MSG 
MSG is an abbreviation for MonoSodium Glutamate 
 
MSH 
MSH is an abbreviation for Marvel Super Heroes 
 
MSL 
MSL is an abbreviation for Mean Sea Level 
 
MSPCA 
MSPCA is an abbreviation for Massachussetts Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals 
 
MSPE 
MSPE is an abbreviation for Mercenaries, Spies & Private Eyes 
 
MSRP 
MSRP is an abbreviation for Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price 
 
MSS 
MSS is an abbreviation for Management Support System 
ManuScriptS 
Mass Storage System 
Maximum Segment Size [TCP/IP] (see also MTU) 
 
MST 
MST is an abbreviation for Mountain Standard Time 
 
MT 
MT is an abbreviation for Metric Ton 
Mountain Time 
 
MTA 
MTA is an abbreviation for Message Transfer Agent 
Metropolitan Transportation Authority 
 
MTBF 
MTBF is an abbreviation for Mean Time Between Failures 
 
MTC 
MTC is an abbreviation for Man Tended Capability [Space] 
 
MTR 
MTR is an abbreviation for Magnetic Tape Recording 
 
MTSO 
MTSO is an abbreviation for Mobile Telephone Switching Office [Telephony] 
 
MTTF 
MTTF is an abbreviation for Mean Time To Failure 
 
MTTR 
MTTR is an abbreviation for Mean Time To Recovery 
Mean Time To Repair 
 
MTU 
MTU is an abbreviation for Maximum Transfer Unit [Networking] (see also 
MSS) 
 
MTV 
MTV is an abbreviation for Music TeleVision 
 
MUF 
MUF is an abbreviation for Maximum Usable Frequency (max freq during 
sunspot activity) 
 
MULTICS 
MULTICS is an abbreviation for MULTiplex Information Computer Services 
 
MUMPS 
MUMPS is an abbreviation for Mgh Utility MultiProgram System 
 
MUNG 
MUNG is an abbreviation for Mung Until No Good (see the hacker's 
dictionary) 
 
MUX 
MUX is an abbreviation for MUltipleXor 
 
MVA 
MVA is an abbreviation for MegaVolt Ampere 
 
MVS 
MVS is an abbreviation for Multiple Virtual Storage [IBM] 
 
MX 
MX is an abbreviation for Missile eXperimental 
 
N 
N is an abbreviation for North 
Notice 
 
NA 
NA is an abbreviation for Narcotics Anonymous 
North America 
Not Applicable 
 
NAACP 
NAACP is an abbreviation for National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People 
 
NAAS 
NAAS is an abbreviation for North American Automated Systems co. 
 
NAB 
NAB is an abbreviation for National Association of Broadcasters 
 
NABISCO 
NABISCO is an abbreviation for NAtional BIScuit COmpany [Corporate name] 
 
NACCIRN 
NACCIRN is an abbreviation for North American Coordinating Committee for 
Intercontinental Research Networking (see also CCIRN) 
 
NACS 
NACS is an abbreviation for National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors 
 
NAD 
NAD is an abbreviation for Network Access Device 
 
NADGE 
NADGE is an abbreviation for NATO Air Defense Ground Environment 
 
NAG 
NAG is an abbreviation for Numerical Algorithms Group 
 
NAGE 
NAGE is an abbreviation for National Association of Government Employees 
 
NAK 
NAK is an abbreviation for Negative AcKnowledge 
 
NAM 
NAM is an abbreviation for Name and Address Module [Telephony] (cellular 
phone changeable ROM) 
National Account Manager [Telephony, AT&T] 
Number Assignment Module [Telephony] (cellular phone changeable ROM) 
 
NANP 
NANP is an abbreviation for North American Numbering Plan 
 
NAPAP 
NAPAP is an abbreviation for National Acid Precipitation Assessment 
Program 
 
NAR 
NAR is an abbreviation for Nuclear Acoustic Resonance 
 
NARDAC 
NARDAC is an abbreviation for NAvy Regional Data Automation Center 
 
NAS 
NAS is an abbreviation for National Academy of Sciences 
National Advanced Systems 
 
NASA 
NASA is an abbreviation for National (US) Aeronautics and Space 
Administration [Space] 
 
NASDA 
NASDA is an abbreviation for NAtional (Japan) Space Development Agency 
[Space] 
 
NASM 
NASM is an abbreviation for National (US) Air and Space Museum [Space] 
 
NASP 
NASP is an abbreviation for National (US) AeroSpace Plane [Space] 
 
NATO 
NATO is an abbreviation for North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
 
NAVDAC 
NAVDAC is an abbreviation for NAVal Data Automation Command 
 
NAVSWC 
NAVSWC is an abbreviation for NAVal Surface Weapons Center 
 
NB 
NB is an abbreviation for New Brunswick 
Nota Bene 
 
NBA 
NBA is an abbreviation for National (US) Basketball Association 
 
NBC 
NBC is an abbreviation for National (US) Broadcasting Company [Corporate 
name] 
 
NBFM 
NBFM is an abbreviation for NarrowBand Frequency Modulation 
 
NBO 
NBO is an abbreviation for Network Build Out 
 
NBS 
NBS is an abbreviation for National Bureau of Standards (renamed NIST) 
[US Government] 
 
NBVM 
NBVM is an abbreviation for Narrow Band Voice Modulation 
 
NC 
NC is an abbreviation for No Charge 
No Connection 
North Carolina 
 
NCA 
NCA is an abbreviation for Network Control Analysis 
 
NCC 
NCC is an abbreviation for National (US) Computer Conference 
National (US) Council of Churches 
 
NCDC 
NCDC is an abbreviation for National (US) Climatic Data Center 
 
NCE 
NCE is an abbreviation for New Catholic Edition 
 
NCGA 
NCGA is an abbreviation for National (US) Computer Graphics Association 
 
NCI 
NCI is an abbreviation for National (US) Cancer Institute [US Government] 
 
NCIC 
NCIC is an abbreviation for National (US) Cartographic Information Center 
 
NCO 
NCO is an abbreviation for Non-Commissioned Officer 
 
NCP 
NCP is an abbreviation for Network Control Program 
 
NCR 
NCR is an abbreviation for National (US?) Cash Register [Corporate name] 
 
NCS 
NCS is an abbreviation for Network Computing System 
 
NCSA 
NCSA is an abbreviation for National (US) Center for Supercomputing 
Applications 
 
NCSC 
NCSC is an abbreviation for National (US) Computer Security Center [NSA] 
 
NCTL 
NCTL is an abbreviation for National Computer and Telecommunications 
Laboratory 
 
NCV 
NCV is an abbreviation for No Commercial Value 
 
ND 
ND is an abbreviation for No Date 
North Dakota 
 
NDA 
NDA is an abbreviation for Non-Disclosure Agreement 
 
NDDL 
NDDL is an abbreviation for Neutral Data Definition Language 
 
NDE 
NDE is an abbreviation for News Development Environment 
 
NDEA 
NDEA is an abbreviation for National (US) Defense Education Act 
 
NDL 
NDL is an abbreviation for Network Database Language 
 
NDP 
NDP is an abbreviation for New Democratic Party (Canada) 
 
NDSL 
NDSL is an abbreviation for National (US) Defense Student Loan 
National (US) Direct Student Loan 
 
NDT 
NDT is an abbreviation for Newfoundland Daylight Time 
 
NDV 
NDV is an abbreviation for NASP Derived Vehicle 
NASP Derived Vehicle [Space] 
 
NE 
NE is an abbreviation for New England 
North East 
 
NEAR 
NEAR is an abbreviation for National Electronic Accounting and Reporting 
system 
 
NEARnet 
NEARnet is an abbreviation for New England Academic and Research Network 
 
NEB 
NEB is an abbreviation for New English Bible 
 
NEC 
NEC is an abbreviation for Nippon Electric Company [Corporate name] 
 
NEI 
NEI is an abbreviation for Not Elsewhere Included 
 
NES 
NES is an abbreviation for National Energy Strategy 
Not Elsewhere Specified 
 
NESC 
NESC is an abbreviation for National Energy Software Center 
 
NET 
NET is an abbreviation for NETwork 
National (US) Educational Television 
New England Telephone 
 
NEWS 
NEWS is an abbreviation for Network extensible Window System 
 
NEXRAD 
NEXRAD is an abbreviation for NEXt generation weather RADar 
 
NF 
NF is an abbreviation for No Funds 
 
NFC 
NFC is an abbreviation for National (US) Football Conference 
 
NFFE 
NFFE is an abbreviation for National (US) Federation of Federal Employees 
 
NFL 
NFL is an abbreviation for National (US) Football League 
 
NFS 
NFS is an abbreviation for Network File System 
 
NG 
NG is an abbreviation for National Guard 
No Good 
 
NGC 
NGC is an abbreviation for New General Catalog [Space] 
 
NH 
NH is an abbreviation for New Hampshire 
 
NHI 
NHI is an abbreviation for National Health Insurance 
 
NHL 
NHL is an abbreviation for National (Canada) Hockey League 
 
NHLBI 
NHLBI is an abbreviation for National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(Bethesda, MD) 
 
NIC 
NIC is an abbreviation for Network Information Center ("The NIC" is 
NIC.DDN.MIL) 
 
NICMOS 
NICMOS is an abbreviation for Near Infrared Camera / Multi Object 
Spectrometer (HST upgrade) [Space] 
 
NIFTP 
NIFTP is an abbreviation for (a file transfer network in the UK) 
 
NIH 
NIH is an abbreviation for National (US) Institutes of Health 
Not Invented Here 
 
NIM 
NIM is an abbreviation for Nuclear Instrumentation Module (an electronic 
instr. standard) 
 
NIMH 
NIMH is an abbreviation for National Institute of Mental Health 
(Rockville, MD) 
 
NIMS 
NIMS is an abbreviation for Near-Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (on 
Galileo) [Space] 
 
NIR 
NIR is an abbreviation for Near InfraRed [Space] 
 
NIS 
NIS is an abbreviation for Network Information System (formerly yp) 
 
NISO 
NISO is an abbreviation for National Information Standards Organization 
 
NIST 
NIST is an abbreviation for National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (formerly NBS) [US Government] 
 
NJ 
NJ is an abbreviation for New Jersey 
 
NJB 
NJB is an abbreviation for New Jersey Bell [Telephony] 
 
NL 
NL is an abbreviation for National League (baseball) 
 
NLM 
NLM is an abbreviation for National Library of Medicine 
 
NLP 
NLP is an abbreviation for Natural Language Processing 
 
NLRB 
NLRB is an abbreviation for National Labor Relations Board 
 
NLS 
NLS is an abbreviation for Network License Server 
 
NM 
NM is an abbreviation for Nautical Mile 
New Mexico 
Night Message 
No Mark; Not Marked 
 
NMOS 
NMOS is an abbreviation for N channel Metal Oxide Semiconductor (N-MOS) 
(see MOS) 
 
NMR 
NMR is an abbreviation for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
 
NMS 
NMS is an abbreviation for Network Monitoring Station 
 
NNE 
NNE is an abbreviation for North North East 
 
NNTP 
NNTP is an abbreviation for Net News Transfer Protocol 
 
NNW 
NNW is an abbreviation for North North West 
 
NNX 
NNX is an abbreviation for NANP syntax for a three-digit string, N:{2-9}, 
X:{0-9} [Telephony] 
 
NOA 
NOA is an abbreviation for NSWC Office Automation 
 
NOAA 
NOAA is an abbreviation for National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration [Space, US Government] 
 
NOAO 
NOAO is an abbreviation for National (Tucson, AZ, US) Optical 
Astronomical Observatories [Space] 
 
NOC 
NOC is an abbreviation for Network Operations Center 
 
NORAD 
NORAD is an abbreviation for NORth American Defense Command 
 
NORM 
NORM is an abbreviation for Naturally Occuring Radioactive Material 
 
NORML 
NORML is an abbreviation for National Organization for the Reform of 
Marijuana Laws 
 
NOS 
NOS is an abbreviation for Not Otherwise Specified 
 
NOSC 
NOSC is an abbreviation for Naval Ocean Systems Center 
 
NOTIS 
NOTIS is an abbreviation for Network Operator Trouble Information System 
 
NOW 
NOW is an abbreviation for Negotiable Order for Withdrawal [Banking] (Is 
this MA or NE specific?) 
 
NOx 
NOx is an abbreviation for Nitrogen Oxides 
 
NP 
NP is an abbreviation for No Protest 
Nondeterministic-Polynomial 
Notary Public 
Noun Phrase 
 
NPA 
NPA is an abbreviation for Numbering Plan Area (area code) [Telephony] 
 
NPC 
NPC is an abbreviation for Non-Player Character (see PC) [Role-playing] 
 
NPL 
NPL is an abbreviation for National Physical Laboratory (UK) 
Non-Procedural Language 
 
NPN 
NPN is an abbreviation for Negative-Positive-Negative (transistor) 
NonProtein Nitrogen 
 
NPR 
NPR is an abbreviation for National Public Radio 
non-Processor Request [PDP11, UNIBUS] 
 
NQS 
NQS is an abbreviation for Network Queuing System 
 
NRA 
NRA is an abbreviation for National Reconstruction Act (FDR era US) 
National Rifle Association 
 
NRAO 
NRAO is an abbreviation for National Radio Astronomical Observatory 
[Space] 
 
NRC 
NRC is an abbreviation for National Research Council 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
 
NRE 
NRE is an abbreviation for Non-Recurring Engineering (as in NRE costs) 
 
NREN 
NREN is an abbreviation for National (US) Research and Education Network 
 
NRL 
NRL is an abbreviation for Naval Research Labs 
 
NRO 
NRO is an abbreviation for National Reconnaissance Office 
National Reconnaissance Organization [Space] 
 
NRZ 
NRZ is an abbreviation for Non-Return to Zero 
 
NRZI 
NRZI is an abbreviation for Non-Return to Zero Inverted (magnetic tape, 
800 bpi) 
 
NS 
NS is an abbreviation for Neutron Star [Space] 
Not Specified 
Nova Scotia 
Nuclear Ship 
 
NSA 
NSA is an abbreviation for National Security Agency [US Government] 
 
NSAP 
NSAP is an abbreviation for Network Service Access Point [OSI, 
Networking] 
 
NSC 
NSC is an abbreviation for National (US) Security Council [US Government] 
 
NSE 
NSE is an abbreviation for Network Software Environment 
 
NSF 
NSF is an abbreviation for National (US) Science Foundation [US 
Government] 
 
NSS 
NSS is an abbreviation for Nodal Switching System [NSFnet] 
 
NSSDC 
NSSDC is an abbreviation for National Space Science Data Center [Space] 
 
NST 
NST is an abbreviation for Newfoundland Standard Time 
 
NSTS 
NSTS is an abbreviation for National Space Transportation System [Space] 
 
NSW 
NSW is an abbreviation for New South Wales (Australia) 
 
NSWC 
NSWC is an abbreviation for Naval Surface Warfare Center 
Naval Surface Weapons Center 
 
NT 
NT is an abbreviation for New Testament 
Newfoundland Time 
Northern Territory 
 
NTEU 
NTEU is an abbreviation for National Treasury Employees Union 
 
NTIS 
NTIS is an abbreviation for National Technical Information Service 
 
NTN 
NTN is an abbreviation for Neutralized Twisted Nematic 
 
NTP 
NTP is an abbreviation for Network Time Protocol [Internet] 
Normal Temperature and Pressure (see STP) 
 
NTSB 
NTSB is an abbreviation for National Transportation Safety Board [US 
Government] 
 
NTSC 
NTSC is an abbreviation for National Television Standards Committee 
Never Twice Same Color 
 
NTT 
NTT is an abbreviation for New Technology Telescope [Space] 
Nippon Telephone & Telegraph 
 
NU 
NU is an abbreviation for Name Unknown 
 
NURBS 
NURBS is an abbreviation for NonUniform Rational B-Spline 
 
NUSC 
NUSC is an abbreviation for Naval Underwater Systems Center [US 
Government] 
 
NV 
NV is an abbreviation for Nevada 
 
NW 
NW is an abbreviation for North West 
 
NWNET 
NWNET is an abbreviation for NorthWestNet 
 
NWS 
NWS is an abbreviation for National Weather Service 
 
NWT 
NWT is an abbreviation for North West Territories (Australia) 
 
NXX 
NXX is an abbreviation for NANP syntax for a three-digit string, N:{2-9}, 
X:{0-9} [Telephony] 
 
NY 
NY is an abbreviation for New York 
 
NYC 
NYC is an abbreviation for New York City 
 
NYNEX 
NYNEX is an abbreviation for New York and New England (Telephone) 
 
NYPD 
NYPD is an abbreviation for New York Police Department 
 
NYSE 
NYSE is an abbreviation for New York Stock Exchange 
 
NYSERNet 
NYSERNet is an abbreviation for New York State Educational and Research 
Network 
 
NZ 
NZ is an abbreviation for New Zealand 
 
NZUSUGI 
NZUSUGI is an abbreviation for New Zealand Unix System User Group, Inc. 
 
OA 
OA is an abbreviation for Office Automation 
Overeaters Anonymous 
 
OAO 
OAO is an abbreviation for Orbiting Astronomical Observatory [Space] 
 
OAS 
OAS is an abbreviation for Organization of American States 
 
OATS 
OATS is an abbreviation for Office Automation Technology and Services 
 
OBE 
OBE is an abbreviation for Order of the British Empire 
 
OBS 
OBS is an abbreviation for Omni Bearing Selector 
 
OC 
OC is an abbreviation for Order of Canada 
 
OCDM 
OCDM is an abbreviation for Office of Civil Defense and Mobilization 
 
OCI 
OCI is an abbreviation for Out of City Indicator 
 
OCLC 
OCLC is an abbreviation for Online Computer Library Center (Ohio College 
Library Catalog) 
Online Computer Library Center, Inc. 
 
OCO 
OCO is an abbreviation for Object Code Only 
 
OCR 
OCR is an abbreviation for Optical Character Recognition 
 
OCS 
OCS is an abbreviation for Officer Candidate School 
 
OCST 
OCST is an abbreviation for Office of Commercial Space Transportation 
[Space] 
 
OD 
OD is an abbreviation for Doctor of Optometry 
Oculus Dexter (right eye) 
Officer of the Day 
OverDose 
 
ODI 
ODI is an abbreviation for Optical Digital Image 
 
ODISS 
ODISS is an abbreviation for Optical Digital Image Storage System 
 
ODT 
ODT is an abbreviation for Octal Debugging Technique 
Online Debugging Technique 
 
OE 
OE is an abbreviation for Old English 
 
OED 
OED is an abbreviation for Oxford English Dictionary 
 
OEM 
OEM is an abbreviation for Original Equipment Manufacturer 
 
OEO 
OEO is an abbreviation for Office of Economic Opportunity 
 
OES 
OES is an abbreviation for Order of the Eastern Star 
 
OEXP 
OEXP is an abbreviation for Office of Exploration [NASA] 
 
OF 
OF is an abbreviation for Old French 
 
OFM 
OFM is an abbreviation for Order of Friars Minor 
 
OFS 
OFS is an abbreviation for Order of Free State 
 
OG 
OG is an abbreviation for Original Gum 
 
OH 
OH is an abbreviation for Ohio 
 
OIRA 
OIRA is an abbreviation for Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs 
 
OIU 
OIU is an abbreviation for Office Interface Unit 
 
OJT 
OJT is an abbreviation for On the Job Training 
 
OLTP 
OLTP is an abbreviation for On-Line Transaction Processing 
 
OMB 
OMB is an abbreviation for Office of Management and Budget [US 
Government] 
 
OMD 
OMD is an abbreviation for Orchestral Manouevers in the Dark 
 
OMS 
OMS is an abbreviation for Orbital Maneuvering System [Space] 
 
OMV 
OMV is an abbreviation for Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle [Space] 
 
ON 
ON is an abbreviation for Old Norse 
 
ONC 
ONC is an abbreviation for Open Network Computing 
 
ONI 
ONI is an abbreviation for Office of Naval Intelligence 
Operator Number Identification [Telephony] 
 
ONR 
ONR is an abbreviation for Office of Naval Research 
 
OOP 
OOP is an abbreviation for Object Oriented Programming 
 
OOPART 
OOPART is an abbreviation for Out Of Place ARTifact 
 
OOPS 
OOPS is an abbreviation for Object-Oriented Programming System 
 
OP 
OP is an abbreviation for OFFICEPOWER office automation system, trademark 
of CCI 
Observation Post 
Order of Preachers 
Out of Print 
 
OPEC 
OPEC is an abbreviation for Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
 
OPF 
OPF is an abbreviation for Orbiter Processing Facility [Space] 
 
OPM 
OPM is an abbreviation for Office of Personnel Management 
 
OPUS 
OPUS is an abbreviation for Obvious Password Utility System (Eugene 
Spafford <Spaf@Purdue.Edu>) 
 
OR 
OR is an abbreviation for Operating Room 
Oregon 
Owner's Risk, Own Risk 
 
ORFEUS 
ORFEUS is an abbreviation for Orbiting and Retrievable Far and Extreme 
Ultraviolet Spectrometer [Space] 
 
ORNL 
ORNL is an abbreviation for Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
 
OROM 
OROM is an abbreviation for Optical Read Only Memory 
 
OS 
OS is an abbreviation for Oculus Sinister (left eye) 
Operating System 
Ordinary Seaman 
Out of Stock 
 
OSB 
OSB is an abbreviation for Order of St. Benedict 
 
OSC 
OSC is an abbreviation for Orbital Sciences Corporation [Space] 
 
OSCAR 
OSCAR is an abbreviation for Orbiting Satelite Carry Amateur Radio (1st 
launched 12 Dec 1961) 
Orbiting Satellite Carry Amateur Radio (1st launched 12 Dec 1961) 
Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio [Space] 
 
OSCRL 
OSCRL is an abbreviation for Operating System Command Response Language 
 
OSD 
OSD is an abbreviation for Office of the Secretary of Defense 
 
OSDIT 
OSDIT is an abbreviation for Office of Software Development and 
Information Technology 
 
OSF 
OSF is an abbreviation for Open Software Foundation 
Open Systems Foundation 
Order of St. Francis 
 
OSHA 
OSHA is an abbreviation for Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
[US Government] 
 
OSI 
OSI is an abbreviation for Office of Scientific Integrity [NIH] 
Open Systems Interconnection (per ISO; 7 layer model) 
 
OSI/RM 
OSI/RM is an abbreviation for Open Systems Interconnection/Reference 
Model 
 
OSME 
OSME is an abbreviation for Open Systems Message Exchange 
 
OSP 
OSP is an abbreviation for Optical Storage Processor 
 
OSPFIGP 
OSPFIGP is an abbreviation for Open Shortest-Path First Internal Gateway 
Protocol [Internet] 
 
OSS 
OSS is an abbreviation for Office Support System 
Office of Strategic Services (later CIA) 
Operation Support System [Telephony, AT&T] 
 
OSSA 
OSSA is an abbreviation for Office of Space Science and Applications 
[Space] 
 
OSSE 
OSSE is an abbreviation for Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer 
Experiment (on GRO) [Space] 
 
OSTP 
OSTP is an abbreviation for (White House) Office of Science and 
Technology Policy [US Government] 
Office of Science and Technology Policy 
 
OT 
OT is an abbreviation for Old Testament 
OverTime 
 
OT&LF 
OT&LF is an abbreviation for Open Taxi & Limousine Foundation 
 
OTA 
OTA is an abbreviation for Office of Technical Assistance 
Office of Technology Assessment 
Optical Telescope Assembly (on HST) [Space] 
 
OTB 
OTB is an abbreviation for Off-Track Betting 
 
OTC 
OTC is an abbreviation for Over The Counter (stocks) 
 
OTF 
OTF is an abbreviation for Open Token Foundation 
 
OTH-B 
OTH-B is an abbreviation for Over The Horizon - Backscatter (as in radar) 
 
OTR 
OTR is an abbreviation for On The Rag 
 
OTS 
OTS is an abbreviation for Officers' Training School 
 
OTV 
OTV is an abbreviation for Orbital Transfer Vehicle [Space] 
 
OUTWATS 
OUTWATS is an abbreviation for OUTward Wide Area Telephone Service 
[Telephony] 
 
OV 
OV is an abbreviation for Orbital Vehicle [Space] 
Orbiter Vehicle [Space] 
 
PA 
PA is an abbreviation for Pennsylvania 
Per Annum 
Play Aid 
Power of Attorney 
Press Agent 
Private Account 
Public Address 
Purchasing Agent 
 
PABX 
PABX is an abbreviation for Private Automatic Branch eXchange [Telephony] 
 
PACCOM 
PACCOM is an abbreviation for Pacific Computer Communications network 
consortium [Networking] 
 
PACX 
PACX is an abbreviation for Private Automatic Computer eXchange 
 
PAD 
PAD is an abbreviation for Packet Assembler-Disassembler [Networking] 
 
PAH 
PAH is an abbreviation for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon 
 
PAL 
PAL is an abbreviation for Phase Alternation Line-rate 
Programmable Array Logic 
 
PAM 
PAM is an abbreviation for Payload Assist Module [Space] 
Pulse Amplification Modulation 
 
PARC 
PARC is an abbreviation for Palo Alto Research Center, xerox 
 
PASS 
PASS is an abbreviation for Personal Access Satellite System [NASA] 
 
PATROL 
PATROL is an abbreviation for Program for Administrative Traffic Reports 
On Line 
 
PBM 
PBM is an abbreviation for Play By Mail game 
 
PBS 
PBS is an abbreviation for Public Broadcasting System 
 
PBX 
PBX is an abbreviation for Private Branch eXchange [Telephony] 
 
PC 
PC is an abbreviation for Peace Corps 
PerCent; PerCentage 
Personal Computer (IBM wants you to believe a specific kind) 
Player Character (see NPC) [Role-playing] 
Post Card 
Post Cibum (after meals) 
Privileged Character 
Privy Council 
Program Counter 
Progressive Conservative party [Canada] 
Providence College 
 
PC-DOS 
PC-DOS is an abbreviation for Personal Computer DOS 
 
PC/AT 
PC/AT is an abbreviation for Personal Computer/Advanced Technology 
 
PCB 
PCB is an abbreviation for PolyChlorinated Biphenyl 
Printed Circuit Board 
 
PCI 
PCI is an abbreviation for Panel Call Indicator 
 
PCIE 
PCIE is an abbreviation for President's Council on Integrity and 
Efficiency 
 
PCL 
PCL is an abbreviation for Printer Command Language 
 
PCM 
PCM is an abbreviation for Plug-Compatible Mainframe 
Pulse Code Modulation 
 
PCPC 
PCPC is an abbreviation for Personal Computers Peripheral Corporation 
 
PCS 
PCS is an abbreviation for Permanent Change of Station 
 
PCTE 
PCTE is an abbreviation for Portable Common Tools Environment 
 
PCTS 
PCTS is an abbreviation for Posix Conformance Test Suite 
 
PD 
PD is an abbreviation for Per Diem 
Police Department 
Potential Difference 
Public Domain 
 
PDAD 
PDAD is an abbreviation for Proposed Draft ADdendum 
 
PDE 
PDE is an abbreviation for Partial Differential Equation 
 
PDES 
PDES is an abbreviation for Product Data Exchange Specifications 
 
PDF 
PDF is an abbreviation for Program Development Facility 
 
PDL 
PDL is an abbreviation for Page Description Language 
Program Design Language 
 
PDN 
PDN is an abbreviation for Public Data Network 
 
PDP 
PDP is an abbreviation for Plasma Display Panel 
Programmed Data Processor 
Programmed Data Processor [DEC] 
 
PDQ 
PDQ is an abbreviation for Pretty Damned Quick 
 
PDS 
PDS is an abbreviation for Premises Distribution System [AT&T] 
 
PDT 
PDT is an abbreviation for Pacific Daylight Time 
 
PE 
PE is an abbreviation for Phase Encoded 
Physical Education 
Prince Edward island 
Printer's Error 
Professional Engineer 
Protestant Episcopal 
 
PEI 
PEI is an abbreviation for Prince Edward Island 
 
PEP 
PEP is an abbreviation for Productivity Enhancement Project 
 
PEPE 
PEPE is an abbreviation for Pepe Est Presque Emacs 
 
PERL 
PERL is an abbreviation for Pathologically Eclectic Rubbish Lister 
Practical Extraction and Report Language 
 
PEX 
PEX is an abbreviation for Phigs/phigs+ Extension to X 
 
PFC 
PFC is an abbreviation for Plasma Fusion Center [MIT] 
 
PG 
PG is an abbreviation for Parental Guidance (suggested) [Movie rating] 
 
PGA 
PGA is an abbreviation for Professional Graphics Adapter 
Pure Grain Alcohol 
 
PHA 
PHA is an abbreviation for Pulse Height Analyzer (or Analysis) 
 
PHIGS 
PHIGS is an abbreviation for Programmers Hierarchical Interactive 
Graphics System 
 
PHS 
PHS is an abbreviation for Public Health Service 
 
PhysRev Physical Review Journal 
PhysRev Physical Review Journal is an abbreviation for   - Phys Rev 
 
PI 
PI is an abbreviation for Principal Investigator 
Priority Interrupt 
Private Investigator 
 
PIC 
PIC is an abbreviation for Plastic/Polyethelene Insulated Cable 
[Telephony] 
Position Independant Code 
 
PIF 
PIF is an abbreviation for Paid In Full 
 
PIT 
PIT is an abbreviation for Principal, Interest, and Taxes 
 
PIXEL 
PIXEL is an abbreviation for PIcture ELement 
 
PLA 
PLA is an abbreviation for Programmable Logic Array 
 
PLATO 
PLATO is an abbreviation for Programmed Learning for Automated Teaching 
Operations (U. Ill., early '70s) 
 
PLC 
PLC is an abbreviation for Programmable Logic Controller 
 
PLCC 
PLCC is an abbreviation for Plastic Leaded Chip Carrier 
 
PLL 
PLL is an abbreviation for Phase-Locked Loop 
 
PLM 
PLM is an abbreviation for Programming Language for Microcomputers 
 
PLO 
PLO is an abbreviation for Palestine (sic?) Liberation Organization (?) 
Please Leave On 
 
PLSS 
PLSS is an abbreviation for Portable Life Support System [Space] 
 
PM 
PM is an abbreviation for PayMaster 
Police Magistrate 
Post Meridiem 
Post Meridiem (after noon) 
PostMaster 
PostMortem 
Pressurized Module [Space] 
Preventive Maintenance 
Prime Minister 
Provost Marshal 
 
PM/X 
PM/X is an abbreviation for Presentation Manager for X windows 
 
PMC 
PMC is an abbreviation for Permanently Manned Capability [Space] 
 
PMIRR 
PMIRR is an abbreviation for Pressure Modulated InfraRed Radiometer (on 
Mars Observer) [Space] 
 
PMO 
PMO is an abbreviation for Prime Minister's Office 
 
PMOS 
PMOS is an abbreviation for P channel Metal Oxide Semiconductor (P-MOS) 
(see MOS) 
 
PMS 
PMS is an abbreviation for PreMenstrual Syndrome 
 
PMT 
PMT is an abbreviation for PhotoMultiplier Tube 
 
PN 
PN is an abbreviation for Promissory Note 
 
PNP 
PNP is an abbreviation for Positive-Negative-Positive (transistor) 
 
PO 
PO is an abbreviation for Petty Officer 
Post Office 
Postal Order 
Purchase Order 
 
POC 
POC is an abbreviation for Port Of Call 
 
POD 
POD is an abbreviation for Pay On Delivery 
 
POE 
POE is an abbreviation for Port Of Embarkation 
Port Of Entry 
 
POGO 
POGO is an abbreviation for Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory 
 
POM 
POM is an abbreviation for Phase Of Moon 
 
POP 
POP is an abbreviation for Point of Presence [Telephony] 
Post Office Protocol [Networking] (esp. TCP/IP) 
 
POPS 
POPS is an abbreviation for Paperless Order Processing System 
 
POR 
POR is an abbreviation for Price On Request 
 
POS 
POS is an abbreviation for Point Of Sale 
Professional Operating System [DEC] 
 
POSI 
POSI is an abbreviation for Promoting conference for OSI 
 
POSIX 
POSIX is an abbreviation for Portable Operating System Interface 
Portable Operating System for unIX 
 
POTS 
POTS is an abbreviation for Plain Old Telephone Service [Telephony] 
 
POTV 
POTV is an abbreviation for Personnel Orbit Transfer Vehicle [Space] 
 
POV 
POV is an abbreviation for Point Of View 
 
POW 
POW is an abbreviation for Prisoner Of War 
 
PP 
PP is an abbreviation for Parcel Post 
Past Participle 
Post Pay (payphone) [Telephony] 
Primary Point 
 
PPB 
PPB is an abbreviation for Parts Per Billion 
 
PPC 
PPC is an abbreviation for Pour Prendre Conge' (to take leave) 
 
PPCS 
PPCS is an abbreviation for Person to Person, Collect, Special 
[Telephony] 
 
PPM 
PPM is an abbreviation for Parts Per Million 
 
PPN 
PPN is an abbreviation for Parameterized Post-Newtonian formalism for 
general relativity 
Project Programmer Number 
 
PPP 
PPP is an abbreviation for Point-to-Point Protocol (successor to SLIP 
(q.v.)) 
 
PPS 
PPS is an abbreviation for PostPostScriptum 
 
pps 
pps is an abbreviation for Packets per Second 
 
PPT 
PPT is an abbreviation for Parts Per Trillion 
Pulse Pair Timing 
Punched Paper Tape 
 
PQ 
PQ is an abbreviation for Province of Quebec 
 
PR 
PR is an abbreviation for PayRoll 
Public Relations 
Puerto Rico 
 
PRC 
PRC is an abbreviation for Planning Research Corporation 
 
PREPnet 
PREPnet is an abbreviation for Pennsylvania Research & Economic 
Partnership Network 
 
PRI 
PRI is an abbreviation for Primary Rate Interface (ISDN) [Telephony] 
 
PRN 
PRN is an abbreviation for pro re nata [Medicine] (as needed?) 
 
PROFS 
PROFS is an abbreviation for PRofessional OFfice System [IBM] 
 
PROM 
PROM is an abbreviation for Programmable Read-Only Memory 
 
PS 
PS is an abbreviation for PicoSecond 
PostScript 
PostScriptum 
Power Steering 
Power Supply 
Proposed Standard 
Public School 
 
PSA 
PSA is an abbreviation for Problem Statement Analyzer 
 
PSC 
PSC is an abbreviation for Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center 
Polar Stratospheric Clouds 
 
PSDN 
PSDN is an abbreviation for Public Switched Data Network [Telephony] 
 
PSDS 
PSDS is an abbreviation for Public Switched Digital Service [Telephony, 
AT&T] 
 
PSE 
PSE is an abbreviation for Programming Support Environment 
 
PSF 
PSF is an abbreviation for Point Spread Function [Space] 
 
PSG 
PSG is an abbreviation for Platoon SerGeant 
 
PSI 
PSI is an abbreviation for Performance Systems International [Corporate 
name, Networking] 
Power Systems, Incorporated [Corporate name, Model Railroading] 
 
PSK 
PSK is an abbreviation for Phase Shift Keying 
 
PSL 
PSL is an abbreviation for Problem Statement Language 
 
PSN 
PSN is an abbreviation for Packet Switch Node [ARPANET/MILNET] (replaced 
IMP) 
 
PSR 
PSR is an abbreviation for Product Specific Realizations 
PulSaR [Space] 
 
PSS 
PSS is an abbreviation for (unknown to me, but something in the UK 
environment) 
 
PST 
PST is an abbreviation for Pacific Standard Time 
 
PSTN 
PSTN is an abbreviation for Public Switched Telephone Network 
 
PT 
PT is an abbreviation for Pacific Time 
Patrol Torpedo (as in PT boat) 
Physical Therapy 
Physical Training 
 
PTA 
PTA is an abbreviation for Parent-Teacher Association 
 
PTD 
PTD is an abbreviation for Parallel Transfer Disk 
 
PTL 
PTL is an abbreviation for Praise The Lord (ministry) 
 
PTN 
PTN is an abbreviation for Plant Test Number [Telephony] (actual number 
assigned for 800 service) 
 
PTO 
PTO is an abbreviation for Patent and Trademark Office 
Please Turn Over 
Power Take-Off 
 
PTT 
PTT is an abbreviation for Post, Telephone and Telegraph administration 
 
PTV 
PTV is an abbreviation for Passenger Transport Vehicle [Space] 
 
PUC 
PUC is an abbreviation for Public Utilities Commision 
 
PV 
PV is an abbreviation for Photovoltaic [Space] 
 
PVC 
PVC is an abbreviation for Permanent Virtual Circuit (see also VC) 
Poly-Vinyl Chloride 
 
PVO 
PVO is an abbreviation for Pioneer Venus Orbiter [Space] 
 
PW 
PW is an abbreviation for Prisoner of War (usually POW) 
 
PWG 
PWG is an abbreviation for Permanent Working Group 
 
PX 
PX is an abbreviation for Post eXchange (see BX) 
 
q.v. 
q.v. is an abbreviation for ???? (Latin(?): which see) 
 
QAM 
QAM is an abbreviation for Quadrature Amplitude Modulation 
 
QC 
QC is an abbreviation for Quality Control 
Queen's Counsel (KC when queen reigning) 
 
QD 
QD is a medical abbreviation for Quaque Die (daily) 
 
QDA 
QDA is an abbreviation for Quantity Discount Agreement 
 
QED 
QED is an abbreviation for Quod Erat Demonstrandum (which was to be 
demonstrated) 
 
QEF 
QEF is an abbreviation for Quod Erat Faciendum (which was to be done) 
 
QEI 
QEI is an abbreviation for Quod Erat Inveniendum (which was to be found 
out) 
 
QET 
QET is an abbreviation for Quantum Effect Transistor 
 
QIC 
QIC is an abbreviation for Quarter-Inch Cartridge 
 
QID 
QID is an abbreviation for Quater In Die (four times a day) [Medicine] 
 
QLI 
QLI is an abbreviation for Query Language Interpreter 
 
QM 
QM is an abbreviation for QuarterMaster 
 
QMC 
QMC is an abbreviation for QuarterMaster Corps 
 
QMF 
QMF is an abbreviation for Query Management Facility 
 
QMG 
QMG is an abbreviation for QuarterMaster General 
 
QMS 
QMS is an abbreviation for Quality Micro Systems [Corporate name] 
 
QNS 
QNS is an abbreviation for Quantity Not Sufficient 
 
QSO 
QSO is an abbreviation for Quasi-Stellar Object [Space] 
 
QWERTY 
QWERTY is an abbreviation for first six keys from left on top alphabetic 
row of standard keyboard 
 
R 
R is an abbreviation for Restricted [Movie rating] 
Rolemaster 
 
R&B 
R&B is an abbreviation for Rhythm and Blues (commonly R and B) 
 
R&D 
R&D is an abbreviation for Research and Development (commonly R and D) 
 
RA 
RA is an abbreviation for Regular Army 
Research Assistant 
Royal Academy 
 
RAAF 
RAAF is an abbreviation for Royal Australian Air Force 
 
RACE 
RACE is an abbreviation for Random Access Card Equipment 
 
RACEP 
RACEP is an abbreviation for Random Access and Correlation for Extended 
Performance 
 
RAD 
RAD is an abbreviation for Radiation Absorbed Dose 
Rapid Access Disk 
 
RADAR 
RADAR is an abbreviation for RAdio Detection And Ranging 
 
RADM 
RADM is an abbreviation for Rear ADMiral 
 
RAF 
RAF is an abbreviation for Royal Air Force 
 
RAM 
RAM is an abbreviation for Random Access Memory (R/W) 
Red Academicia de Mexico (Mexican Academic Network) 
 
RARDE 
RARDE is an abbreviation for Royal Armaments Research and Development 
Establishment 
 
RARE 
RARE is an abbreviation for R\'eseaux Associ\'es pour la Recherche 
Europ\'eenne (the European Organization of Research Networks) 
 
RAS 
RAS is an abbreviation for Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability 
 
RASC 
RASC is an abbreviation for Residence Account Service Center 
 
RATS 
RATS is an abbreviation for Radio Amateur Telecommunications Society 
 
RBC 
RBC is an abbreviation for Red Blood Count 
 
RBI 
RBI is an abbreviation for Runs Batted In 
 
RBOC 
RBOC is an abbreviation for Regional Bell Operating Company 
 
RC 
RC is an abbreviation for Red Cross 
Regional Center 
Resistor-Capacitor circuit (as in filters) 
Roman Catholic 
 
RCA 
RCA is an abbreviation for Radio Corporation of America [Corporate name] 
 
RCAF 
RCAF is an abbreviation for Royal Canadian Air Force 
 
RCAS 
RCAS is an abbreviation for Reserve Component Automation System 
 
RCC 
RCC is an abbreviation for Radio Common Carrier 
 
RCMP 
RCMP is an abbreviation for Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 
RCS 
RCS is an abbreviation for Reaction Control System [Space] 
 
RD 
RD is an abbreviation for Rural Delivery 
 
RDA 
RDA is an abbreviation for Remote Data Access 
 
RDBMS 
RDBMS is an abbreviation for Relational DataBase Management System 
 
RDF 
RDF is an abbreviation for Radio Direction Finding 
 
REA 
REA is an abbreviation for Rail Express Agency 
 
RECON 
RECON is an abbreviation for Reconnaissance 
 
REM 
REM is an abbreviation for Rapid Eye Movement 
 
REO 
REO is an abbreviation for R. E. Olds 
Removable, Erasable, Optical 
 
RETMA 
RETMA is an abbreviation for Radio {something(equipment?)?} {something?} 
Manufacturers' Association (????) 
 
REXX 
REXX is an abbreviation for Restructured EXtended eXecutor 
 
RF 
RF is an abbreviation for Radio Frequency 
Radio Frequency [Space] 
 
RFC 
RFC is an abbreviation for Request For Comments (ala ARPA Internet) 
 
RFD 
RFD is an abbreviation for Rehoboth (MA) Fire Department 
Rural Free Delivery 
 
RFI 
RFI is an abbreviation for Radio Frequency Interference 
Radio Frequency Interference [Space] 
 
RFP 
RFP is an abbreviation for Request for Proposal 
 
RFQ 
RFQ is an abbreviation for Request for Quote 
 
RFS 
RFS is an abbreviation for Remote File System 
 
RGB 
RGB is an abbreviation for Red Green Blue 
 
RGP 
RGP is an abbreviation for Raster Graphics Processor 
 
RH 
RH is an abbreviation for Right Hand 
 
RHC 
RHC is an abbreviation for Regional (Bell) Holding Company 
 
RHS 
RHS is an abbreviation for Right Hand Side 
 
RI 
RI is an abbreviation for Rhode Island 
 
RIACS 
RIACS is an abbreviation for Research Institute for Advanced Computer 
Science (NASA) 
Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science [Space] 
 
RIAS 
RIAS is an abbreviation for Radio In the American Sector, berlin 
 
RIF 
RIF is an abbreviation for Reading Is Fundamental 
Reduction In Force 
 
RILM 
RILM is an abbreviation for Repertoire International de Literature 
Musicale 
 
RIP 
RIP is an abbreviation for Rest In Peace (or Requiescat In Pace : latin) 
Routing Interchange Protocol 
 
RIPE 
RIPE is an abbreviation for R\'eseaux IP Europ\'eenne (European IP 
Networks) (of RARE, q.v.) 
 
RISC 
RISC is an abbreviation for Reduced Instruction Set Computer 
 
RITA 
RITA is an abbreviation for Recognition of Information Technology 
Achievement award 
 
RJE 
RJE is an abbreviation for Remote Job Entry 
 
RLC 
RLC is an abbreviation for Resistor Inductor Capacitor 
 
RLG 
RLG is an abbreviation for Research Libraries Group 
 
RLIN 
RLIN is an abbreviation for Research Libraries Information Network (run 
by RLG (q.v.)) 
 
RLL 
RLL is an abbreviation for Run Length Limited 
 
RMA 
RMA is an abbreviation for Radio Manufacturers' Association 
Return Materials Authorization 
 
RMATS 
RMATS is an abbreviation for Remote Maintenance Administration and 
Traffic System [Telephony] 
 
RMS 
RMS is an abbreviation for Remote Manipulator System [Space] 
Richard M. Stallman 
Root Mean Square 
Royal Mail Ship 
 
RN 
RN is an abbreviation for Registered Nurse 
Royal Navy 
 
RNA 
RNA is an abbreviation for RiboNucleic Acid 
 
RNGC 
RNGC is an abbreviation for Revised New General Catalog [Space] 
 
RNZAF 
RNZAF is an abbreviation for Royal New Zealand Air Force 
 
ROFF 
ROFF is an abbreviation for Run-OFF 
 
ROG 
ROG is an abbreviation for Receipt Of Goods 
 
ROM 
ROM is an abbreviation for Range Of Motion [Medicine] 
Read-Only Memory 
Rupture Of Membrane (as in birth) 
 
ROSAT 
ROSAT is an abbreviation for ROentgen SATellite [Space] 
 
ROSE 
ROSE is an abbreviation for RATS (q.v.) Open Systems Environment 
Remote Operations Service Entity (per ISO/CCITT layer 7) 
 
ROTC 
ROTC is an abbreviation for Reserve Officers' Training Corps 
 
ROTS 
ROTS is an abbreviation for Rotary Out Trunks Selectors 
 
ROYGBIV 
ROYGBIV is an abbreviation for Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, 
Violet 
 
RPC 
RPC is an abbreviation for Remote Procedure Call 
 
RPG 
RPG is an abbreviation for RePort Generator 
Role Playing Game 
 
RPI 
RPI is an abbreviation for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
 
RPM 
RPM is an abbreviation for Revolutions Per Minute 
 
RPN 
RPN is an abbreviation for Reverse Polish Notation 
 
RPO 
RPO is an abbreviation for Railway Post Office 
 
RPS 
RPS is an abbreviation for Revolutions Per Second 
 
RPV 
RPV is an abbreviation for Remotely Piloted Vehicle 
 
RQ 
RQ is an abbreviation for RuneQuest 
 
RR 
RR is an abbreviation for RailRoad 
Route Relay 
Rural Route 
 
RRO 
RRO is an abbreviation for Rate and Route Operator [Telephony] 
 
RS 
RS is an abbreviation for Recommended Standard (EIA) 
Recording Secretary 
Revised Status 
Right Side 
Royal Society 
 
RSCS 
RSCS is an abbreviation for Remote Spooling Communications Subsystem 
 
RSFSR 
RSFSR is an abbreviation for Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic 
 
RSN 
RSN is an abbreviation for Real Soon Now 
 
RSU 
RSU is an abbreviation for Remote Switching Unit 
 
RSV 
RSV is an abbreviation for Revised Standard Edition 
 
RSVP 
RSVP is an abbreviation for Repondez S'il Vous Plait (please reply) 
 
RSWC 
RSWC is an abbreviation for Right Side up With Care 
 
RT 
RT is an abbreviation for RadioTelephone 
RealTime 
 
RTA 
RTA is an abbreviation for Remote Trunk Arrangement [Telephony] 
 
RTAC 
RTAC is an abbreviation for Regional Technical Assistance Center 
[Telephony] 
 
RTF 
RTF is an abbreviation for Rich Text Format 
 
RTFM 
RTFM is an abbreviation for Read The @!# Manual 
Read The F***ing Manual 
 
RTG 
RTG is an abbreviation for Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator 
Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator [Space] 
 
RTLS 
RTLS is an abbreviation for Return To Launch Site (Shuttle abort mode) 
[NASA, Shuttle, Space] 
 
RTR 
RTR is an abbreviation for Ready to Run [Model Railroading] 
Reel-To-Reel 
 
RTS 
RTS is an abbreviation for Request To Send (EIA RS-232-C) 
 
RTTY 
RTTY is an abbreviation for Radio Teletype 
 
RU 
RU is an abbreviation for Receive Unit 
 
RVD 
RVD is an abbreviation for Remote Virtual Disk [MIT] 
 
RW 
RW is an abbreviation for Right Worshipful 
Right Worthy 
 
RX 
RX is an abbreviation for Receive 
 
Ry 
Ry is an abbreviation for Railway 
 
S 
S is an abbreviation for South 
Supplement 
 
S&C 
S&C is an abbreviation for Skull & Crossbones 
 
S/C 
S/C is an abbreviation for SpaceCraft [Space] 
 
SA 
SA is an abbreviation for Salvation Army 
Seaman Apprentice 
Service Assistant 
Sex Appeal 
Sine Anno (without date) 
South Africa 
South America 
Subject to Approval 
 
SAA 
SAA is an abbreviation for South Atlantic Anomaly 
South Atlantic Anomaly [Space] 
Systems Application Architecture 
 
SAC 
SAC is an abbreviation for Special Area Code [Telephony] (represent 
services, not places) 
Strategic Air Command (see TAC) 
Strategic Air Command [US military] 
 
SADD 
SADD is an abbreviation for Students Against Drunk Driving 
 
SAFENET 
SAFENET is an abbreviation for Survivable Adaptable Fiberoptic Embedded 
Network [US Navy] 
 
SAM 
SAM is an abbreviation for Surface to Air Missile 
Surface-to-Air Missile 
 
SAMA 
SAMA is an abbreviation for Step-by-step Automatic Message Accounting 
[Telephony] 
 
SAMPEX 
SAMPEX is an abbreviation for Solar Anomalous and Magnetospheric Particle 
EXplorer [Space] 
 
SAMTO 
SAMTO is an abbreviation for Space And Missile Test Organization [Space] 
 
SAO 
SAO is an abbreviation for Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory [Space] 
 
SAP 
SAP is an abbreviation for Second Audio Program 
Service Access Point [OSI, Networking] 
 
SAR 
SAR is an abbreviation for Search And Rescue 
Synthetic Aperture Radar 
 
SARA 
SARA is an abbreviation for Satellite pour Astronomie Radio Amateur 
[Space] 
Stichting Academisch Rekencentrum Amsterdam (Amsterdam Universities 
Computing Center) 
 
SAREX 
SAREX is an abbreviation for Search and Rescue Exercise [Space] 
Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment [Space] 
 
SARTS 
SARTS is an abbreviation for Switched Access Remote Test System 
 
SAS 
SAS is an abbreviation for Small Astronomy Satellite 
Space Activity Suit [Space] 
 
SASE 
SASE is an abbreviation for Self-Addressed Stamped Envelope 
 
SASI 
SASI is an abbreviation for Shugart Associates Systems Interface 
 
SAT 
SAT is an abbreviation for Satellite [Space] 
 
SAW 
SAW is an abbreviation for Surface Acoustic Wave 
 
SBA 
SBA is an abbreviation for Small Business Administration 
 
SC 
SC is an abbreviation for Secondary Channel 
Sectional Center 
South Carolina 
SubCommittee 
 
SCA 
SCA is an abbreviation for Shuttle Carrier Aircraft [Space] 
 
SCAD 
SCAD is an abbreviation for Subsonic Cruise Armed Decoy 
 
SCADC 
SCADC is an abbreviation for Standard Central Air Data Computer 
 
SCAME 
SCAME is an abbreviation for SCreen oriented Anti-Misery Editor 
 
SCAMP 
SCAMP is an abbreviation for Single-Chip A-series Mainframe Processor 
 
SCAN 
SCAN is an abbreviation for Switched Circuit Automatic Network 
 
SCC 
SCC is an abbreviation for Specialized Common Carriers 
Switching Control Center 
 
SCCS 
SCCS is an abbreviation for Source Code Control System 
 
SCE 
SCE is an abbreviation for Signal Conversion Equipment 
Structure Chart Editor 
 
SCI 
SCI is an abbreviation for SpaceCraft Incorporated 
 
SCIFI 
SCIFI is an abbreviation for SCIence FIction (often used pejoratively of 
what really isn't) 
 
SCO 
SCO is an abbreviation for Santa Cruz Operation 
 
SCOOPS 
SCOOPS is an abbreviation for SCheme Object Oriented Programming System 
 
SCOTS 
SCOTS is an abbreviation for Surveilance and Control Of Transmission 
Systems 
 
SCSI 
SCSI is an abbreviation for Small Computer Systems Interface 
 
SCT 
SCT is an abbreviation for Schmidt-Cassegrain Telescope [Space] 
 
SCUBA 
SCUBA is an abbreviation for Self Contained Underwater Breathing 
Apparatus 
 
SCUD 
SCUD is an abbreviation for Subsonic Cruise Unarmed Decoy 
 
SD 
SD is an abbreviation for South Dakota 
 
SDB 
SDB is an abbreviation for Source(?) DeBugger 
 
SDI 
SDI is an abbreviation for Standard Disk Interconnect [DEC] 
Strategic Defense Initiative [Space, US Government] 
 
SDIO 
SDIO is an abbreviation for Strategic Defense Initiative Organization 
[Space, US Government] 
 
SDLC 
SDLC is an abbreviation for Synchronous Data Link Control [IBM] 
 
SDM 
SDM is an abbreviation for Sub-rate Data Multiplexer 
 
SDN 
SDN is an abbreviation for Software Defined Network [Telephony, AT&T] 
System Development Network (Korea) 
 
SDO 
SDO is an abbreviation for Staff Duty Officer 
 
SDSC 
SDSC is an abbreviation for San Diego Supercomputer Center 
 
SDV 
SDV is an abbreviation for Shuttle Derived Vehicle [Space] 
 
SE 
SE is an abbreviation for Service Engineer (see also CE, FE) 
South East 
 
SEATO 
SEATO is an abbreviation for SouthEast Asia Treaty Organization 
 
SEC 
SEC is an abbreviation for Security Exchange Commission 
 
SECNAV 
SECNAV is an abbreviation for SECretary of the NAVy 
 
SED 
SED is an abbreviation for Stream EDitor 
 
SEI 
SEI is an abbreviation for Software Engineering Institute (Carnegie 
Mellon) 
Space Exploration Initiative [Space] 
 
SEL 
SEL is an abbreviation for Software Engineering Laboratory 
 
SEM 
SEM is an abbreviation for Scanning Electron Microscope 
 
SEST 
SEST is an abbreviation for Swedish-European Submillimeter Telescope 
[Space] 
 
SETI 
SETI is an abbreviation for Search for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence 
[Space] 
Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence [Space] 
 
SF 
SF is an abbreviation for San Francisco 
Science Fiction; Speculative Fiction 
Standard Form 
Star Frontiers 
 
SFRPG 
SFRPG is an abbreviation for Science Fiction Role Playing Game 
 
SG 
SG is an abbreviation for StarGuard 
SubGroup 
 
SGML 
SGML is an abbreviation for Standard Generalized Markup Language 
 
SHAPE 
SHAPE is an abbreviation for Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe 
 
SHAR 
SHAR is an abbreviation for SHell ARchiver 
 
SHCD 
SHCD is an abbreviation for Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective 
 
SHF 
SHF is an abbreviation for Super High Frequency (3-30GHz) 
 
SHRPG 
SHRPG is an abbreviation for Super Hero Role Playing Game 
 
SI 
SI is an abbreviation for Staten Island 
 
SIAM 
SIAM is an abbreviation for Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics 
 
SID 
SID is an abbreviation for Sudden Ionospheric Disturbance [Space] 
 
SIG 
SIG is an abbreviation for Special Interest Group 
 
SIGCAT 
SIGCAT is an abbreviation for Special Interest Group for Cd-rom 
Applications Technology 
 
SIMD 
SIMD is an abbreviation for Single Instruction, Multiple Data 
 
SIMM 
SIMM is an abbreviation for Single In-line Memory Module 
System Integrated Memory Module 
 
SINE 
SINE is an abbreviation for SINE is not EINE 
 
SIPS 
SIPS is an abbreviation for Satellite Imagery Processing System 
 
SIR 
SIR is an abbreviation for Shuttle Imaging Radar [Space] 
 
SIRTF 
SIRTF is an abbreviation for Space (formerly Shuttle) InfraRed Telescope 
Facility [Space] 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility [Space] 
 
SIS 
SIS is an abbreviation for Strategic Information System 
 
SISCOM 
SISCOM is an abbreviation for Satellite Information System COMpany 
 
SITA 
SITA is an abbreviation for Societe Internationale Telecommunications 
Aeronautiques 
 
SJ 
SJ is an abbreviation for Society of Jesus 
 
Skyhook 
Skyhook is an abbreviation for Surface to space "elevator" transportation 
system [Space] 
 
SL 
SL is an abbreviation for Salvage Loss 
Space Launch [Space] 
SpaceLab [Space] 
 
SLA 
SLA is an abbreviation for Special Libraries Association 
Synchronous Line Adapter 
 
SLAC 
SLAC is an abbreviation for Stanford Linear Accelerator Center 
 
SLAN 
SLAN is an abbreviation for Sine Loco, Anno, (vel) Nomine (without place, 
year, or name) 
 
SLAR 
SLAR is an abbreviation for Side Looking Airborne Radar 
Side-Looking Airborne Radar [Space] 
 
SLBM 
SLBM is an abbreviation for Submarine Launched Ballistic Missiles 
 
SLC 
SLC is an abbreviation for Space Launch Complex [Space] 
Subscriber Loop Carrier [Telephony] 
 
SLDC 
SLDC is an abbreviation for Synchronous Data Link Control 
 
SLIP 
SLIP is an abbreviation for Serial Line IP (sometimes SL/IP) (see also 
PPP) 
Serial Line Internet Protocol 
 
SLP 
SLP is an abbreviation for Super Long Play (VHS VCR) 
 
SLS 
SLS is an abbreviation for Space(lab) Life Sciences [Space] 
 
SM 
SM is an abbreviation for Service Mark 
 
SMA 
SMA is an abbreviation for Sergeant Major of the Army 
Spectrum Manufacturers Association 
 
SMC 
SMC is an abbreviation for Small Magellanic Cloud (see LMC) 
Small Magellanic Cloud [Space] 
 
SMD 
SMD is an abbreviation for Storage Module Device (interface standard for 
disk drives) 
Surface Mounted Devices 
 
SMDR 
SMDR is an abbreviation for Station Message Detail Recording [Telephony] 
 
SMDS 
SMDS is an abbreviation for Switched Multi-megabit Data Service 
[Telephony, Networking] 
 
SME 
SME is an abbreviation for Solar Mesosphere Explorer [Space] 
 
SMEGMA 
SMEGMA is an abbreviation for Sophisticated Modern Editor with Gloriously 
Magnificent Abilities 
 
SMERSH 
SMERSH is an abbreviation for Abbr. of Russian phrase meaning "Death to 
the spies." 
 
SMEX 
SMEX is an abbreviation for SMall EXplorers [Space] 
 
SMILS 
SMILS is an abbreviation for Sonobuoy Missile Impact Location System 
 
SMM 
SMM is an abbreviation for Solar Maximum Mission (satellite 1980-1989) 
[Space] 
 
SMTP 
SMTP is an abbreviation for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
 
SMU 
SMU is an abbreviation for Southeastern Massachusetts University 
Southern Methodist University 
 
SN 
SN is an abbreviation for Science News [Periodical] 
Serial Number 
Super Nova 
SuperNova (e.g., SN1987A) [Space] 
 
SNA 
SNA is an abbreviation for Systems Network Architecture [IBM] 
 
SNADS 
SNADS is an abbreviation for SNA Distribution Services 
 
SNAFU 
SNAFU is an abbreviation for Situation Normal -- All Fouled Up (also more 
profane versions) 
 
SNAP 
SNAP is an abbreviation for Shipboard Non-tactical Automated data 
Processing program 
Sub Network Access Protocol [OSI, Networking] 
 
SNCF 
SNCF is an abbreviation for Societe National des Chemins de Fer (French 
National Railways) 
 
SNF 
SNF is an abbreviation for Server-Natural Format 
 
SNMP 
SNMP is an abbreviation for Simple Network Management Protocol [TCP/IP] 
 
SNOBOL 
SNOBOL is an abbreviation for StriNg Oriented symbOLic Language 
 
SNPA 
SNPA is an abbreviation for SubNetwork Point of Attachment 
 
SNR 
SNR is an abbreviation for Signal to Noise Ratio 
Signal to Noise Ratio [Space] 
SuperNova Remnant [Space] 
 
SNU 
SNU is an abbreviation for Solar Neutrino Units [Space] 
 
SO 
SO is an abbreviation for Seller's Option 
Significant Other 
Space Opera 
Strike Out 
 
SOAP 
SOAP is an abbreviation for Symbolic Optimizing Assembler Program 
 
SOFIA 
SOFIA is an abbreviation for Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared 
Astronomy [Space] 
 
SOH 
SOH is an abbreviation for Start Of Header, ASCII control character 
(dec=01,control-A) 
 
SOHIO 
SOHIO is an abbreviation for Standard Oil of oHIO [Corporate name] 
 
SOHO 
SOHO is an abbreviation for SOlar Heliospheric Observatory [Space] 
 
SOL 
SOL is an abbreviation for Short on Landing (or, colloquially, Shit Out 
of Luck) 
 
SONAR 
SONAR is an abbreviation for SOund Detection And Ranging 
 
SONET 
SONET is an abbreviation for Synchronous Optical Network [Telephony] 
 
SOP 
SOP is an abbreviation for Standard Operating Procedure 
 
SOS 
SOS is an abbreviation for Save Our Souls (International standard 
distress call, Morse ...---...) 
Silicon On Sapphire 
Son of Stopgap (editor) [DEC] 
 
SP 
SP is an abbreviation for Shore Patrol 
Short Play (VHS VCR) 
Southern Pacific [Corporate name, Railroading] 
Stack Pointer 
Star Patrol 
 
SPA 
SPA is an abbreviation for Software Publishers Association 
 
SPAG 
SPAG is an abbreviation for Standards Promotion and Applications Group 
 
SPAN 
SPAN is an abbreviation for Space Physics and Analysis Network [NASA] 
(DECnet) 
Space Physics and Analysis Network [Space] 
 
SPAR 
SPAR is an abbreviation for Stock Points Adp Replacement 
 
SPARC 
SPARC is an abbreviation for Scalable Processor ARChitecture 
Standards, Planning, And Requirements Committee 
 
SPAWAR 
SPAWAR is an abbreviation for naval SPAce and WARfare command 
 
SPC 
SPC is an abbreviation for Software Productivity Consortium 
 
SPCA 
SPCA is an abbreviation for Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals 
 
SPCC 
SPCC is an abbreviation for Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Children 
 
SPDM 
SPDM is an abbreviation for Special Purpose Dextrous Manipulator [Space] 
 
SPEC 
SPEC is an abbreviation for Systems Performance Evaluation Cooperative 
 
SPITBOL 
SPITBOL is an abbreviation for SPeedy ImplemenTation of snoBOL 
 
SPNI 
SPNI is an abbreviation for Society for the Protection of Nature in 
Israel 
 
SPOT 
SPOT is an abbreviation for Systeme Probatoire pour l'Observation de la 
Terre [Space] 
 
SPS 
SPS is an abbreviation for Solar Power Satellite [Space] 
 
SPUR 
SPUR is an abbreviation for Systech Pluraxial Unplug Repeater 
 
SQIID 
SQIID is an abbreviation for Simultaneous Quad Infrared Imaging Device 
(at NOAO) 
 
SQL 
SQL is an abbreviation for Structured Query Language 
 
SQUID 
SQUID is an abbreviation for Superconducting QUantum Interference Device 
 
SRAM 
SRAM is an abbreviation for Short Range Attack Missile 
Static RAM 
 
SRB 
SRB is an abbreviation for Solid (fuel) Rocket Booster [Space] 
 
SRG 
SRG is an abbreviation for Short and Ring Ground (test) [Telephony] 
 
SRI 
SRI is an abbreviation for Stanford Research Institute 
 
SRM 
SRM is an abbreviation for Solid Rocket Motor [Space] 
 
SRO 
SRO is an abbreviation for Standing Room Only 
 
SS7 
SS7 is an abbreviation for Signalling System #7 [Telephony] 
 
SSA 
SSA is an abbreviation for Social Security Administration [US Government] 
 
SSB 
SSB is an abbreviation for Single Side Band 
 
SSC 
SSC is an abbreviation for Superconducting Super Collider 
 
SSE 
SSE is an abbreviation for South-SouthEast 
 
SSF 
SSF is an abbreviation for Space Station Fred (er, Freedom) [Space] 
Space Station Freedom [NASA, Space] 
 
SSFF 
SSFF is an abbreviation for Showcase Software Factory of the Future 
 
SSG 
SSG is an abbreviation for Staff SerGeant 
 
SSI 
SSI is an abbreviation for Small Scale Integration 
Solid-State Imager (on Galileo) [Space] 
Space Services Incorporated [Corporate name, Space] 
Space Studies Institute [Space] 
Supplemental Security Income 
 
SSME 
SSME is an abbreviation for Space Shuttle Main Engine [Space] 
 
SSPF 
SSPF is an abbreviation for Space Station Processing Facility [Space] 
 
SSPS 
SSPS is an abbreviation for Satellite Solar Power Station [Space] 
 
SSR 
SSR is an abbreviation for Secondary Surveillance Radar 
Soviet Socialist Republic 
 
SSRMS 
SSRMS is an abbreviation for Space Station Remote Manipulator System 
[Space] 
 
SST 
SST is an abbreviation for Spectroscopic Survey Telescope [Space] 
SuperSonic Transport [Space] 
 
SSTO 
SSTO is an abbreviation for Single Stage To Orbit [Space] 
 
SSTV 
SSTV is an abbreviation for Slow Scan TeleVision 
 
SSW 
SSW is an abbreviation for South-SouthWest 
 
ST 
ST is an abbreviation for Short Ton 
 
STARS 
STARS is an abbreviation for Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable 
Systems 
 
STD 
STD is an abbreviation for Sacrae Theologiae Doctor (doctor of sacred 
theology) 
Sexually Transmitted Disease (replaces VD) 
State Transition Diagram 
Subscriber Trunk Dialing (British, and elsewhere; equiv. DDD in USA) 
 
STI 
STI is an abbreviation for Standard Tape Interconnect [DEC] 
 
STILO 
STILO is an abbreviation for Scientific and Technical Intelligence 
Liaison Office 
 
STIS 
STIS is an abbreviation for Space Telescope Imaging Spectrometer (to 
replace FOC and GHRS) [Space] 
 
STL 
STL is an abbreviation for St. Louis (airport designation) 
 
STN 
STN is an abbreviation for SuperTwisted Nematic 
 
STOL 
STOL is an abbreviation for Short TakeOff and Landing 
 
STP 
STP is an abbreviation for Shielded Twisted Pair [Telecom, Networking] 
Software Through Pictures 
Standard Temperature and Pressure (see NTP) 
 
STRPG 
STRPG is an abbreviation for Star Trek:  The Role-Playing Game 
 
STS 
STS is an abbreviation for Space Transportation System (space shuttle) 
[NASA] 
 
STScI 
STScI is an abbreviation for Space Telescope Science Institute [Space] 
 
STV 
STV is an abbreviation for Single Transferable Vote 
Space Transfer Vehicle [Space] 
 
SUM 
SUM is an abbreviation for Symantec Utilities for Macintosh 
 
SUN 
SUN is an abbreviation for SUN MicroSystems Computer (not an Acronym) 
[Corporate name] 
Stanford University Network 
 
SUNOCO 
SUNOCO is an abbreviation for SUN Oil COmpany [Corporate name] 
 
SUNY 
SUNY is an abbreviation for State University of New York 
 
SURAnet 
SURAnet is an abbreviation for Southeastern Universities Research 
Association Network 
 
SVID 
SVID is an abbreviation for System V Interface Definition 
 
SW 
SW is an abbreviation for South West 
SuperWorld 
 
SWAS 
SWAS is an abbreviation for Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite 
[Space] 
 
SWBT 
SWBT is an abbreviation for South Western Bell Telephone [Telephony] 
 
SWF 
SWF is an abbreviation for ShortWave Fading [Space] 
 
SWIFT 
SWIFT is an abbreviation for Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Communications 
 
SWS 
SWS is an abbreviation for Scientific Workstation Support 
 
SXS 
SXS is an abbreviation for Step by Step switching [Telephony] 
 
T 
T is an abbreviation for Traveler 
 
T&T 
T&T is an abbreviation for Tunnels & Trolls 
 
T1 
T1 is an abbreviation for 1.544Mbps [Telephony], one of the basic 
signalling systems 24x64Kb 
 
T3 
T3 is an abbreviation for 45Mbps (eq 28 T1 channels) [Telephony] 
 
TA 
TA is an abbreviation for Teaching Assistant 
 
TAC 
TAC is an abbreviation for Tactical Air Command (see SAC) 
Terminal Access Controller [ARPANET/MILNET] (replaced TIP) 
 
TACACS 
TACACS is an abbreviation for Terminal Access Controller Access Control 
System [ARPANET/MILNET] 
 
TACCS 
TACCS is an abbreviation for Tactical Army Combat service support 
Computer System 
 
TAE 
TAE is an abbreviation for Transportable Applications Environment 
 
TAL 
TAL is an abbreviation for Trans-Atlantic Abort Landing [NASA, Shuttle] 
Transatlantic Abort Landing (Shuttle abort plan) [Space] 
 
TANSTAAFL 
TANSTAAFL is an abbreviation for There Ain't No Such Thing As A Free 
Lunch 
 
TAR 
TAR is an abbreviation for Tape ARchiver 
 
TASI 
TASI is an abbreviation for Time Assign{ment,ed} Speech Interpolation 
[Telephony] 
 
TAU 
TAU is an abbreviation for Thousand Astronomical Units [Space] 
 
TB 
TB is an abbreviation for TuBerculosis 
 
TBA 
TBA is an abbreviation for To Be Announced 
 
TBD 
TBD is an abbreviation for To Be Determined 
To Be Done 
 
TC 
TC is an abbreviation for Teachers College 
 
TCA 
TCA is an abbreviation for Terminal Controlled Airspace 
 
TCP 
TCP is an abbreviation for Transmission Control Protocol 
 
TCP/IP 
TCP/IP is an abbreviation for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol 
 
TCS 
TCS is an abbreviation for Thermal Control System [Space] 
 
TCSEC 
TCSEC is an abbreviation for Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria 
(orange book) 
 
TCT 
TCT is an abbreviation for To Challenge Tomorrow 
 
TD 
TD is an abbreviation for Tardive Dyskinesia 
TouchDown 
Treasury Department 
 
TDCC 
TDCC is an abbreviation for Transportation Data Coordinating Committee 
 
TDE 
TDE is an abbreviation for Transition Diagram Editor 
 
TDI 
TDI is an abbreviation for Trusted Database Interpretation 
 
TDM 
TDM is an abbreviation for Time-Division Multiplexer 
 
TDR 
TDR is an abbreviation for Time Domain Reflectometer 
 
TDRS 
TDRS is an abbreviation for Tracking and Data Relay Satellite [Space] 
 
TDRSS 
TDRSS is an abbreviation for Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System 
[Space] 
 
TDY 
TDY is an abbreviation for Temporary DutY 
 
TECO 
TECO is an abbreviation for Tape Editor and COrrector 
Text Editor and COrrector 
 
TEFLON 
TEFLON is an abbreviation for polyTEtraFLuOrethyleNe 
 
TES 
TES is an abbreviation for Thermal Emission Spectrometer (on Mars 
Observer) [Space] 
 
TFP 
TFP is an abbreviation for Tops Filing Protocol 
 
TFS 
TFS is an abbreviation for Translucent File System 
 
TFT 
TFT is an abbreviation for The Fantasy Trip 
Thin Film Transistor 
 
TG 
TG is an abbreviation for Thieves' Guild 
 
TGV 
TGV is an abbreviation for Tres Grande Vitesse (French, Very High Speed) 
[Railroading] 
Two Guys and a VAX (humorous variant) [Corporate name] 
 
THIEF 
THIEF is an abbreviation for THief Isn't Even Fine 
This Here Isn't Even Fine 
 
THOR 
THOR is an abbreviation for Tandy High-intensity Optical Recording 
 
TI 
TI is an abbreviation for Texas Instruments 
 
TIA 
TIA is an abbreviation for Thanks In Advance [Net jargon] 
Transient Ischemic Attack 
 
TIC 
TIC is an abbreviation for TermInfo Compiler 
 
TID 
TID is an abbreviation for Ter In Die (three times a day) 
Transaction ID 
 
TIFF 
TIFF is an abbreviation for Tag Image File Format 
 
TIP 
TIP is an abbreviation for Terminal Interface Processor [ARPANET/MILNET] 
(replaced by TAC) 
 
TIS 
TIS is an abbreviation for Trusted Information Systems [Corporate name] 
 
TISN 
TISN is an abbreviation for Tokyo International Science Network (Japan) 
 
TKO 
TKO is an abbreviation for Technical Knock Out [Boxing] 
 
TL 
TL is an abbreviation for Total Loss 
 
TLA 
TLA is an abbreviation for Three Letter Acronym 
 
TLC 
TLC is an abbreviation for Tender Loving Care 
 
TLI 
TLI is an abbreviation for Transort-Level Interface 
 
TM 
TM is an abbreviation for TradeMark 
 
TMA 
TMA is an abbreviation for Tycho Magnetic Anomaly (movie 2001) 
 
TMAC 
TMAC is an abbreviation for Treasury department's Multiuser Acquisition 
Contract 
 
TMIS 
TMIS is an abbreviation for Telecommunications Management Information 
System 
 
TMO 
TMO is an abbreviation for Telephone Money Order 
 
TMP 
TMP is an abbreviation for The Morrow Project 
 
TMRC 
TMRC is an abbreviation for Tech Model Railroad Club [MIT] 
Transportation Modeling Research Center (TMRC {above} alter ego) 
 
TN 
TN is an abbreviation for Tennessee 
Twisted Nematic 
 
TNC 
TNC is an abbreviation for Threaded Neill Concelman (connector) 
[Electronics] (see also BNC) 
 
TNF 
TNF is an abbreviation for Tumor Necrosis Factor [Biology, Medicine] 
 
TNP 
TNP is an abbreviation for Tech Nickel Plate (RR) [TMRC] 
 
TNT 
TNT is an abbreviation for TriNitro Toluene 
 
TO 
TO is an abbreviation for Telegraph Office 
Turn Over 
 
TODS 
TODS is an abbreviation for Transactions on Database Systems (ACM) 
 
TOMS 
TOMS is an abbreviation for Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer [Space] 
Transactions on Mathematical Software (ACM) 
 
TOOIS 
TOOIS is an abbreviation for Transactions on Office Information Systems 
(ACM) 
 
TOP 
TOP is an abbreviation for Technical Office Protocol 
 
TOPLAS 
TOPLAS is an abbreviation for Transactions on Programming Languages and 
Systems (ACM) 
 
TOPS 
TOPS is an abbreviation for Traffic Operator Position System [Telephony] 
 
TOPSMP 
TOPSMP is an abbreviation for Traffic Operator Position System 
Multipurpose [Telephony] 
 
TORES 
TORES is an abbreviation for Text ORiented Editing System 
 
TOS 
TOS is an abbreviation for Transfer Orbit Stage [Space] 
 
TOW 
TOW is an abbreviation for Tube launched, Optically tracked, and Wire 
guided 
 
TOY 
TOY is an abbreviation for Time Of Year (clock) 
 
TP 
TP is an abbreviation for Transaction Processing 
Transport Protocol (ISO/CCITT Transport Services (TP0-TP4); like TCP) 
 
TP4 
TP4 is an abbreviation for Transport Protocol, class 4 [ISO] 
 
TPC 
TPC is an abbreviation for The Phone Company (from classic movie:  The 
President's Analyst ) 
 
TPI 
TPI is an abbreviation for Tracks Per Inch 
 
TPO 
TPO is an abbreviation for Traveling Post Office 
 
TPP 
TPP is an abbreviation for TetraarylPorPhyrin 
 
TPS 
TPS is an abbreviation for Technical Publishing Software 
TeleProcessing Services 
Thermal Protection System [Space] 
 
TR 
TR is an abbreviation for Tech Report (at least at LCS (q.v.), maybe 
others) 
Technical Reference [Bell, Telephony] 
 
TRG 
TRG is an abbreviation for Tip and Ring Ground (test) [Telephony] 
 
TROFF 
TROFF is an abbreviation for Text RunOFF, text formatter 
 
TRUSIX 
TRUSIX is an abbreviation for TRUSted unIX 
 
TRW 
TRW is an abbreviation for Thompson, Ramo, and Woolridge 
 
TS 
TS is an abbreviation for Top Secret 
 
TSAP 
TSAP is an abbreviation for Transport Service Access Point [OSI, 
Networking] 
 
TSD 
TSD is an abbreviation for Total System Design 
 
TSP 
TSP is an abbreviation for Teleprocessing Services Program 
Thrift Savings Plan 
Time Synchronization Protocol 
TriSodium Phosphate 
 
TSR 
TSR is an abbreviation for TSR (Fortune 500 Company that manufactures 
Dungeons & Dragons) 
 
TSS 
TSS is an abbreviation for Tethered Satellite System [Space] 
 
TSTO 
TSTO is an abbreviation for Two Stage to Orbit [Space] 
 
TTFN 
TTFN is an abbreviation for Tah Tah, For Now 
 
TTL 
TTL is an abbreviation for Transistor Transistor Logic 
 
TTMA 
TTMA is an abbreviation for Tennessee Tech Microcomputer Association 
 
TTU 
TTU is an abbreviation for Tennessee Technological University 
 
TTY 
TTY is an abbreviation for TeleTYpe 
 
TUNIS 
TUNIS is an abbreviation for Toronto UNIversity System 
 
TV 
TV is an abbreviation for TeleVision 
 
TVA 
TVA is an abbreviation for Tennessee Valley Authority 
 
TW 
TW is an abbreviation for Thieves' World 
 
TWA 
TWA is an abbreviation for Trans World Airlines [Corporate name] 
 
TWB 
TWB is an abbreviation for Terrestrial WideBand [Networking, DARPA] 
 
TWIMC 
TWIMC is an abbreviation for To Whom It May Concern 
 
TWT 
TWT is an abbreviation for Traveling Wave Tube 
 
TWX 
TWX is an abbreviation for TeletypeWriter eXchange 
 
TX 
TX is an abbreviation for Texas 
 
Tx 
Tx is an abbreviation for Transmit 
 
U 
U is an abbreviation for Universe 
 
u 
u is an abbreviation for (representing the greek mu) - micro 
 
UA 
UA is an abbreviation for United Artists 
 
UAR 
UAR is an abbreviation for United Arab Republic 
User Action Routine 
 
UARS 
UARS is an abbreviation for Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite [Space] 
 
UART 
UART is an abbreviation for Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter 
 
UBA 
UBA is an abbreviation for UniBus Adapter [DEC] 
 
UBC 
UBC is an abbreviation for Universal Bibliographic Control 
University of British Columbia 
 
UBM 
UBM is an abbreviation for Unpressurized Berthing Mechanism [Space] 
 
UCAR 
UCAR is an abbreviation for University Corporation for Atmospheric 
Research 
 
UCB 
UCB is an abbreviation for University of California at Berkeley 
 
UCD 
UCD is an abbreviation for Uniform Call Distributor [Telephony] 
University of California at Davis 
 
UCI 
UCI is an abbreviation for University of California at Irvine 
 
UCL 
UCL is an abbreviation for University College London 
 
UCLA 
UCLA is an abbreviation for University of California at Los Angeles 
 
UCR 
UCR is an abbreviation for University of California at Riverside 
 
UCSB 
UCSB is an abbreviation for University of California at Santa Barbara 
 
UCSC 
UCSC is an abbreviation for University of California at Santa Cruz 
 
UCSD 
UCSD is an abbreviation for University of California at San Diego 
 
UCSF 
UCSF is an abbreviation for University of California at San Francisco 
 
UDB 
UDB is an abbreviation for Unified DataBase 
 
UDMH 
UDMH is an abbreviation for Unsymmetrical DiMethyl Hydrazine [Space] 
 
UDP 
UDP is an abbreviation for User Datagram Protocol 
 
UEC 
UEC is an abbreviation for User Environment Component 
 
UFO 
UFO is an abbreviation for Unidentified Flying Object [Space] 
 
UGC 
UGC is an abbreviation for Uppsala General Catalog [Space] 
 
UH 
UH is an abbreviation for Upper Half 
 
UHF 
UHF is an abbreviation for Ultra High Frequency (300-3000MHz) 
 
UID 
UID is an abbreviation for Unique IDentifier 
User IDentification [UNIX] 
 
UIMS 
UIMS is an abbreviation for User Interface Management System 
 
UIT 
UIT is an abbreviation for Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (Astro package) 
[Space] 
 
UIUC 
UIUC is an abbreviation for University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
UK 
UK is an abbreviation for United Kingdom 
 
UKST 
UKST is an abbreviation for United Kingdom Schmidt Telescope [Space] 
 
UL 
UL is an abbreviation for Underwriters Laboratory 
 
ULANA 
ULANA is an abbreviation for Unified Local-Area Network Architecture 
 
UMOC 
UMOC is an abbreviation for Ugliest Man On Campus [MIT] 
 
UMT 
UMT is an abbreviation for Universal Military Training 
 
UN 
UN is an abbreviation for United Nations 
 
UNESCO 
UNESCO is an abbreviation for United Nations Educational, Scientific, & 
Cultural Organization 
 
UNICEF 
UNICEF is an abbreviation for United Nations International Children's 
Emergency Fund (now United Nat. Child. Fund) 
 
UNICS 
UNICS is an abbreviation for UNiplex Information Computer Services 
 
UNIX 
UNIX is an abbreviation for Not an acronym at all.	Was a joke on 
MIT's MULTICS. 
 
UNMA 
UNMA is an abbreviation for Unified Network Management Architecture 
[AT&T] 
 
UNO 
UNO is an abbreviation for United Nations Organization 
 
UP 
UP is an abbreviation for Union Pacific [Railroading, Corporate name] 
 
UPC 
UPC is an abbreviation for Universal Product Code 
 
UPI 
UPI is an abbreviation for United Press International 
United Press International [Corporate name] 
 
UPS 
UPS is an abbreviation for Uninterruptible Power Supply 
United Parcel Service [Corporate name] 
 
UR 
UR is an abbreviation for University of Rochester 
 
URI 
URI is an abbreviation for University of Rhode Island 
 
US 
US is an abbreviation for United States (of America) 
 
USA 
USA is an abbreviation for Union of South Africa 
United States Army 
United States of America 
 
USAF 
USAF is an abbreviation for United States Air Force 
 
USAFA 
USAFA is an abbreviation for United States Air Force Academy (in Colorado 
Springs) 
 
USAN 
USAN is an abbreviation for University Satellite Network 
 
USB 
USB is an abbreviation for Upper Side Band 
 
USC 
USC is an abbreviation for University of Southern California 
 
USCG 
USCG is an abbreviation for United States Coast Guard 
 
USDA 
USDA is an abbreviation for United States Department of Agriculture 
 
USES 
USES is an abbreviation for United States Employment Service 
 
USFL 
USFL is an abbreviation for United States Football League 
 
USGS 
USGS is an abbreviation for United States Geological Survey 
 
USIA 
USIA is an abbreviation for United States Information Agency 
 
USM 
USM is an abbreviation for United States Mail 
 
USMC 
USMC is an abbreviation for United States Marine Corps 
 
USMP 
USMP is an abbreviation for United States Microgravity Payload [Space] 
 
USN 
USN is an abbreviation for United States Navy 
 
USO 
USO is an abbreviation for United Service Organizations 
Unix Software Operation 
 
USP 
USP is an abbreviation for United States Pharmacopeia 
 
USPS 
USPS is an abbreviation for United States Postal Service 
 
USR 
USR is an abbreviation for User Service Routines 
 
USS 
USS is an abbreviation for United States Ship 
 
USSR 
USSR is an abbreviation for Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
 
USSS 
USSS is an abbreviation for User Services and Systems Support 
 
USW 
USW is an abbreviation for Und So Weiter 
 
UT 
UT is an abbreviation for UTah 
Universal Time (a.k.a. GMT, UTC, or Zulu Time) 
University of Tennessee 
University of Texas 
 
UTC 
UTC is an abbreviation for Coordinated Universal Time (a.k.a. UT) 
Universal Coordinated Time (a.k.a. UT) 
 
UTnet 
UTnet is an abbreviation for University of Texas Network 
 
UTP 
UTP is an abbreviation for Unshielded Twisted Pair [Telecom, Networking] 
 
UUCP 
UUCP is an abbreviation for UNIX-to-UNIX Copy Program 
 
UUG 
UUG is an abbreviation for Unix User Group 
 
UV 
UV is an abbreviation for UltraViolet 
 
UVS 
UVS is an abbreviation for UltraViolet Spectrometer 
 
UW 
UW is an abbreviation for UnderWriter 
Univ of Wisconsin 
 
V&H 
V&H is an abbreviation for Vertical and Horizontal (CO coordinate tape) 
[Telephony] 
 
V&V 
V&V is an abbreviation for Villains & Vigilantes 
 
VA 
VA is an abbreviation for Veterans Administration 
Virginia 
 
VAB 
VAB is an abbreviation for Vehicle Assembly Building (formerly Vertical 
Assembly Building) [Space] 
 
VAFB 
VAFB is an abbreviation for Vandenberg Air Force Base [Space] 
 
VAN 
VAN is an abbreviation for Value Added Network (e.g. Tymnet, Telenet, 
etc) 
 
VANS 
VANS is an abbreviation for Value-Added Network Services 
 
VAR 
VAR is an abbreviation for Value Added Remarketer (reseller) 
 
VASI 
VASI is an abbreviation for Visual Approach Slope Indicator 
 
VAT 
VAT is an abbreviation for Value Added Tax 
 
VAX 
VAX is an abbreviation for Virtual Address eXtended 
 
VAXBI 
VAXBI is an abbreviation for VAX Bus Interconnect 
 
VC 
VC is an abbreviation for Viet Cong 
Virtual Circuit 
 
Vcc 
Vcc is an abbreviation for Voltage (Common Cathode?) 
 
VCM 
VCM is an abbreviation for Voice Coil Motor 
 
VCO 
VCO is an abbreviation for Voltage Controlled Oscillator 
 
VCR 
VCR is an abbreviation for VideoCassette Recorder 
 
VCU 
VCU is an abbreviation for Virginia Commonwealth University 
 
VD 
VD is an abbreviation for Venereal Disease (see also STD) 
 
VDFM 
VDFM is an abbreviation for Virtual Disk File Manager 
 
VDI 
VDI is an abbreviation for Virtual Device Interface 
 
VDM 
VDM is an abbreviation for Vienna Development Method 
Virtual Device Metafile 
 
VDT 
VDT is an abbreviation for Video Display Terminal 
 
VEEGA 
VEEGA is an abbreviation for Venus-Earth-Earth Gravity Assist (Galileo 
flight path) [Space] 
 
VF 
VF is an abbreviation for Video Frequency 
Voice Frequency 
 
VFO 
VFO is an abbreviation for Variable Frequency Oscillator 
 
VFR 
VFR is an abbreviation for Visual Flight Rules [Aviation] 
 
VFW 
VFW is an abbreviation for Veterans of Foreign Wars 
Volunteer Fire Department 
 
VG 
VG is an abbreviation for Very Good 
Vicar-General 
 
VGA 
VGA is an abbreviation for Video Graphics Array 
 
Vgg 
Vgg is an abbreviation for Voltage (Gate to Ground?) 
 
VHDL 
VHDL is an abbreviation for Vhsic Hardware Description Language 
 
VHF 
VHF is an abbreviation for Very High Frequency (30-300MHz) 
 
VHS 
VHS is an abbreviation for Video Home System (VCR) 
 
VHSIC 
VHSIC is an abbreviation for Very High Speed Integrated Circuit 
 
VI 
VI is an abbreviation for VIsual editor 
 
VIABLE 
VIABLE is an abbreviation for Vertical Installation Automation BaseLinE 
 
VILE 
VILE is an abbreviation for VI Like Emacs 
 
VINE 
VINE is an abbreviation for Vine Is Not Emacs 
 
VIP 
VIP is an abbreviation for Very Important Person 
 
VISTA 
VISTA is an abbreviation for Volunteers In Service To America 
 
VITA 
VITA is an abbreviation for Vme International Trade Association 
 
VJ 
VJ is an abbreviation for Video Jockey 
 
VL 
VL is an abbreviation for Vulgar Latin 
 
VLA 
VLA is an abbreviation for Very Large Array [Space] 
 
VLBA 
VLBA is an abbreviation for Very Long Baseline Array [Space] 
 
VLBI 
VLBI is an abbreviation for Very Long Baseline Interferometry [Space] 
 
VLF 
VLF is an abbreviation for Very Low Frequency (3-30KHz) 
 
VLIW 
VLIW is an abbreviation for Very Long Instruction Word 
 
VLSI 
VLSI is an abbreviation for Very Large Scale Integration 
 
VLT 
VLT is an abbreviation for Very Large Telescope [Space] 
 
VM 
VM is an abbreviation for Virtual Memory 
 
VM/CMS 
VM/CMS is an abbreviation for Virtual Machine/Conversational Monitor 
System 
 
VMM 
VMM is an abbreviation for Virtual Memory Manager 
 
VMOS 
VMOS is an abbreviation for Vertical Metal Oxide Semiconductor (V-MOS) 
(see MOS) 
 
VMR 
VMR is an abbreviation for Vertical Market Reseller 
 
VMS 
VMS is an abbreviation for Vertical Motion Simulator [Space] 
Virtual Memory System [DEC] 
 
VOA 
VOA is an abbreviation for Voice Of America 
 
VOIR 
VOIR is an abbreviation for Venus Orbiting Imaging Radar (superseded by 
VRM) [Space] 
 
VOIS 
VOIS is an abbreviation for Voice-Operated Information System 
 
VOQ 
VOQ is an abbreviation for Visiting Officer's Quarters 
 
VPI&SU 
VPI&SU is an abbreviation for Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University 
 
VRC 
VRC is an abbreviation for Vertical Redundancy Character 
 
VRM 
VRM is an abbreviation for Venus Radar Mapper (now called Magellan) 
[Space] 
Virtual Resource Manager 
 
VSAT 
VSAT is an abbreviation for Very Small Aperture Terminal (satellite dish) 
 
VSX 
VSX is an abbreviation for X/open Verification Suite 
 
VTAM 
VTAM is an abbreviation for Virtual Telecommunications Access Method 
[IBM] 
 
VTOC 
VTOC is an abbreviation for Volume Table Of Contents 
 
VTOL 
VTOL is an abbreviation for Vertical TakeOff and Landing 
 
VTR 
VTR is an abbreviation for VideoTape Recorder 
 
VUP 
VUP is an abbreviation for Vax Unit of Performance 
 
VVSS 
VVSS is an abbreviation for Vertical Volute Spring Suspension 
 
W 
W is an abbreviation for West 
Width 
 
WA 
WA is an abbreviation for Washington 
Western Australia 
 
WAC 
WAC is an abbreviation for Womens Air Corps 
 
WAIS 
WAIS is an abbreviation for Wide Area Information Server 
 
WARC 
WARC is an abbreviation for World Administrative Conference 
 
WATS 
WATS is an abbreviation for Wide Area Telephone Service 
 
WB 
WB is an abbreviation for Water Ballast 
WayBill 
 
WBC 
WBC is an abbreviation for White Blood Cells 
 
WC 
WC is an abbreviation for Water Closet 
Without Charge 
 
WCTU 
WCTU is an abbreviation for Women's Christian Temperance Union 
 
WD 
WD is an abbreviation for White Dwarf [Space] 
 
WECo 
WECo is an abbreviation for Western Electric Company [AT&T] 
(manufacturing arm of AT&T) 
 
WFPC 
WFPC is an abbreviation for Wide Field / Planetary Camera (on HST) 
[Space] 
 
WFPCII 
WFPCII is an abbreviation for Replacement for WFPC [Space] 
 
WG 
WG is an abbreviation for Working Group 
 
WH 
WH is an abbreviation for WarHammer 
 
WHBL 
WHBL is an abbreviation for World Home Bible League 
 
WHCA 
WHCA is an abbreviation for White House Communications Agency [US 
Government] 
 
WHO 
WHO is an abbreviation for World Health Organization 
 
WI 
WI is an abbreviation for Wisconsin 
 
WIMP 
WIMP is an abbreviation for Windows/Icons/Mouse Programming(?) 
 
WIPP 
WIPP is an abbreviation for (nuclear) Waste Isolation Pilot Plant [DOE] 
 
WIS 
WIS is an abbreviation for WWMCCS Information System 
 
WITS 
WITS is an abbreviation for Washington Interagency Telecommunications 
System 
 
WIYN 
WIYN is an abbreviation for Wisconsin / Indiana / Yale / NOAO telescope 
[Space] 
 
WMSCR 
WMSCR is an abbreviation for Weather Message Switching Center Replacement 
 
WOM 
WOM is an abbreviation for Write Only Memory 
 
WOP 
WOP is an abbreviation for WithOut Papers [Immigration] 
 
WOPR 
WOPR is an abbreviation for War Operations Planned Response (from 
"Wargames" movie) 
 
WORM 
WORM is an abbreviation for Write Once, Read Many times 
 
WOW 
WOW is an abbreviation for Worlds of Wonder 
 
WP 
WP is an abbreviation for Word Processing 
Working Paper 
 
WPI 
WPI is an abbreviation for Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
 
WSI 
WSI is an abbreviation for Wafer Scale Integration 
 
WSMR 
WSMR is an abbreviation for White Sands Missile Range [Space] 
 
WSW 
WSW is an abbreviation for West-SouthWest 
 
WTR 
WTR is an abbreviation for Western Test Range [Space] 
 
WU 
WU is an abbreviation for Washington University 
Western Union 
 
WUPPE 
WUPPE is an abbreviation for Wisconsin Ultraviolet PhotoPolarimter 
Experiment (Astro package) [Space] 
 
WV 
WV is an abbreviation for West Virginia 
 
WW 
WW is an abbreviation for World War 
 
WWI 
WWI is an abbreviation for World War I 
 
WWII 
WWII is an abbreviation for World War II 
 
WWMCCS 
WWMCCS is an abbreviation for World-Wide Military Command and Control 
System 
 
WY 
WY is an abbreviation for Wyoming 
 
WYSIWIS 
WYSIWIS is an abbreviation for What You See Is What I See 
 
WYSIWYG 
WYSIWYG is an abbreviation for What You See Is What You Get 
 
XCF 
XCF is an abbreviation for eXperimental Computing Facility 
 
XD 
XD is an abbreviation for without Dividend 
 
XDR 
XDR is an abbreviation for eXternal Data Representation 
 
XFER 
XFER is an abbreviation for Transfer 
 
XINU 
XINU is an abbreviation for XINU Is Not UNIX 
 
XL 
XL is an abbreviation for eXtra Large 
 
XMM 
XMM is an abbreviation for X-ray Multi Mirror [Space] 
 
XMTR 
XMTR is an abbreviation for transMiTteR (the X is for trans) 
 
XNS 
XNS is an abbreviation for Xerox Network Services 
 
XO 
XO is an abbreviation for eXecutive Officer 
 
XOR 
XOR is an abbreviation for eXclusive OR (logical function) 
 
XPORT 
XPORT is an abbreviation for Transport 
 
XSECT 
XSECT is an abbreviation for cross SECTion 
 
XTAL 
XTAL is an abbreviation for crysTAL (another version of x for crys, see 
XMTR) 
 
XUI 
XUI is an abbreviation for X-windows User Interface 
 
XUV 
XUV is an abbreviation for eXtreme UltraViolet [Space] 
 
YA 
YA is an abbreviation for Yet Another 
 
YACC 
YACC is an abbreviation for Yet Another Compiler Compiler 
 
YB 
YB is an abbreviation for YearBook 
 
YMCA 
YMCA is an abbreviation for Young Mens Christian Association 
 
YMHA 
YMHA is an abbreviation for Young Mens Hebrew Association 
 
YOB 
YOB is an abbreviation for Year Of Birth 
 
YP 
YP is an abbreviation for Yellow Pages 
 
YRS 
YRS is an abbreviation for Ysgarth Rules System 
 
YSO 
YSO is an abbreviation for Young Stellar Object [Space] 
 
YST 
YST is an abbreviation for Yukon Standard Time 
 
YT 
YT is an abbreviation for Yukon Territory 
Yukon Time 
 
YTD 
YTD is an abbreviation for Year To Date 
 
YWCA 
YWCA is an abbreviation for Young Womens Christian Association 
 
YWHA 
YWHA is an abbreviation for Young Womens Hebrew Association 
 
Z 
Z is an abbreviation for Zenith 
Zero 
Zulu (time) 
 
ZB 
ZB is an abbreviation for Zero Beat 
 
ZETA 
ZETA is an abbreviation for Zero Energy Thermonuclear Assembly 
 
ZGS 
ZGS is an abbreviation for Zero Gradient Synchrotron 
 
ZI 
ZI is an abbreviation for Zonal Index 
 
ZIF 
ZIF is an abbreviation for Zero Insertion Force (connector/socket) 
 
ZIP 
ZIP is an abbreviation for Zone Improvement Plan (US post office code) 
 
ZK 
ZK is an abbreviation for barrage balloon (navy symbol) 
 
ZMRI 
ZMRI is an abbreviation for Zinc Metals Research Institute 
 
ZPG 
ZPG is an abbreviation for Zero Population Growth 
 
ZPRSN 
ZPRSN is an abbreviation for Zurich Provisional Relative Sunspot Number 
 
ZST 
ZST is an abbreviation for Zone Standard Time 
 
ZT 
ZT is an abbreviation for Zone Time 
 
ZWEI 
ZWEI is an abbreviation for Zwei Was Eine Initially 
  
  
CURRENCIES OF THE WORLD  
  
 
Afghani 
The afghani is the currency of Afghanistan. 
 
Asper 
The asper was a small Turkish coin in use around 1900. There were 120 
asper to one piastre. 
 
Austral 
The austral is the currency of Argentina. 
 
Baht 
The baht is the currency of Thailand. 
 
Balboa 
The balboa is the currency of Panama. 
 
Bolivar 
The bolivar is the currency of Venezuela. 
 
Boliviano 
The Boliviano was the currency of Bolivia until 1963 when it was replaced 
by the Peso.  
 
Colon 
The Colon is the unit of currency in Costa Rica and El Salvador.  
 
Cordoba 
The cordoba is the currency of Nicaragua. 
 
Crown 
The Crown is the unit of currency in Czechoslovakia.  
 
Cruzeiro 
The Cruzeiro is the currency of Brazil. 
 
Dalasi 
The dalasi is the currency of Gambia. 
 
Daric 
The daric was an ancient Persian gold coin of Darius bearing on one side 
the figure of an archer. 
 
Denarius 
The denarius was an ancient Roman silver coin valued at 10 asses. 
 
Dinar 
The dinar is the currency of Algeria, Bahrain, Iraq, Yugolsavia and South 
Yemen.  
 
Dirham 
The dirham is the currency of Morocco.  
 
Dollar 
The dollar is the currency of Australia, Brunei, Canada, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Jamaica, USA.  
 
Doubloon 
A doubloon was a Spanish coin in use until the 18th century.  
 
Drachma 
The drachma is the currency of Greece.  
 
Escudo 
The escudo is the currency of Portugal and Angola. Until 1975 the escudo 
was the currency in Chile. 
 
Farthing 
The farthing was an English coin. It was one quarter of a penny.  
 
Florin 
The florin was an English 2 shilling coin. It went out of production with 
the adoption of decimal currency. 
 
Forint 
The forint is the currency of hungary.  
 
Franc 
The franc is the principle monetary unit of France, Belgium, Switzerland, 
Burundi, Cameroon, Rwanda and some other countries. 
 
George-noble 
The George-noble was a British gold coin minted during the reign of Henry 
VIII and valued at six shillings and eight pence. It was called the 
George-noble because on the reverse was a picture of St. George slaying a 
dragon. 
 
Gourde 
The gourde is the currency of Haiti.  
 
Groat 
A groat was an English 4 pence coin. The last was struck in 1888. 
 
Groschen 
Groschen was the currency of Germany untill 1872. The first groschen were 
struck in Treves in 1104. In 1525 the groschen was divided into twelve 
pfennige.  
 
Guarani 
The guarani is the currency of Paraguay.  
 
Guilder 
The guilder is the currency of the Netherlands. 
 
Guinea 
The Guinea was an English gold coin worth 21 shillings. Guineas were 
first minted in 1663. The value varied between 20 and 30 shillings until 
it was fixed at 21 shillings in 1717. It was withdrawn from circulation 
in 1817, but the term continued to be used for 21 shillings.  
 
Gulden 
The Gulden was a silver coin of Austria, Hungary and Holland. 
 
Inti 
The inti is the currency of Peru. 
 
Krona 
The krona is the currency of Iceland and Sweden.  
 
Krone 
The krone is the currency of Denmark and Norway.  
 
Kwacha 
The kwacha is the currency of Zambia  
 
Kyat 
The kyat is the currency of Burma.  
 
Lek 
The lek is the currency of Albania. 
 
Leu 
The leu is the currency of Romania. 
 
Lev 
The lev is the currency of Bulgaria.  
 
Lira 
The lira is the currency of Italy and Turkey. 
 
Mark 
The mark is the currency of Germany.  
 
Markka 
The markka is the currency of Finland.  
 
Maundy 
Royal maundy was silver coins struck and distributed to the value of and 
to as many old persons as the monarch's age in Britain.  
 
Milreis 
The milreis was the currency of Portugal until 1911, and of Brazil until 
1942.  
 
Mohur 
The mohur was an Indian gold coin valued at 15 rupees.  
 
Moidore 
The moidore was a Portugese gold coin used from 1690 until 1722.  
 
Naira 
The naira is the currency of Nigeria. 
 
Paisas 
The Paisas is the currency of Bangladesh. There are 100 Paisas to 1 Taka. 
 
Peseta 
The peseta is the currency of Spain and Equatorial Guinea. In Spain 1 
peseta = 100 centimos.  
 
Peso 
The peso is the currency of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, 
Dominican Republic, Mexico, Philippines and Uruguay. 
 
Pound 
The pound is the currency of Egypt, Lebanon and the United Kingdom. 
 
Quetzal 
The quetzal is the currency of Guatemala. 
 
Rand 
The rand is the currency of South Africa, Swaziland, Botswana.  
 
Renminbi 
The renminbi is the currency of China.  
 
Rial 
The rial is the currency of Iran and Saudi Arabia.  
 
Riel 
The Riel is the currency of Cambodia. 
 
Ringgit 
The ringgit is the currency of Malaysia.  
 
Rouble 
The rouble is the currency of Russia. 
 
Rupee 
The rupee is the currency of India and Pakistan.  
 
Rupiah 
The rupiah is the currency of Indonesia.  
 
Schilling 
The schilling is the currency of Austria. 
 
Shekel 
The shekel is the currency of Israel. 
 
Shilling 
The shilling is the currency of Kenya.  
 
Sucre 
The sucre is the currency of Ecuador. 
 
Taka 
The Taka is a unit of currency used in Bangladesh. There are 100 Paisas 
in one 1 Taka.  
 
Thaler 
The thaler was once the currency of Germany. From the name thaler derives 
the word dollar.  
 
Yen 
The yen is the currency of Japan. 
 
Yuan 
The Yuan is the basic monetary unit in China. 
 
Zloty 
The Zloty is the currency of Poland. 
MIND
HAS NO
GENDER

WE ONLY THINK WHEN
WE ARE CONFRONTED
WITH PROBLEMS

I THINK
THEREFORE
I AM

MAN IS THE
MEASURE OF
ALL THINGS

IMAGINATION
DECIDES
EVERYTHING

THE UNIVERSE
HAS NOT ALWAYS
EXISTED

TO BE IS TO BE
MAN IS
PERCEIVED

MAN WAS BORN FREE,
YET EVERYWHERE
HE IS IN CHAINS

THE

AN ANIMAL
THAT MAKES
BARGAINS

PHILOSOPHY
BOOK

BIG IDEAS SIMPLY EXPLAINED
HAPPY IS HE WHO
HAS OVERCOME
HIS EGO

THERE IS
NOTHING
OUTSIDE OF
THE TEXT

MAN IS A
MACHINE

MAN IS AN
INVENTION OF
RECENT DATE

THE END JUSTIFIES
THE MEANS

ACT AS IF WHAT
YOU DO MAKES
A DIFFERENCE

LIFE WILL BE LIVED
ALL THE BETTER IF
IT HAS NO MEANING

OVER HIS OWN
BODY AND MIND,
THE INDIVIDUAL
IS SOVEREIGN

THE

PHILOSOPHY
BOOK

THE

PHILOSOPHY
BOOK

LONDON, NEW YORK, MELBOURNE,
MUNICH, AND DELHI

DK LONDON

DK DELHI

First American Edition 2011

PROJECT ART EDITOR
Anna Hall

PROJECT ART EDITOR
Neerja Rawat

SENIOR EDITOR
Sam Atkinson

ART EDITOR
Shriya Parameswaran

Published in the United States by
DK Publishing
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014

EDITORS
Cecile Landau, Andrew Szudek,
Sarah Tomley

ASSISTANT ART EDITORS
Showmik Chakraborty, Devan Das,
Niyati Gosain, Neha Sharma

EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Manisha Majithia

MANAGING ART EDITOR
Arunesh Talapatra

US EDITORS
Liza Kaplan, Rebecca Warren
MANAGING ART EDITOR
Karen Self
MANAGING EDITOR
Camilla Hallinan
ART DIRECTOR
Philip Ormerod
ASSOCIATE PUBLISHER
Liz Wheeler
PUBLISHER
Jonathan Metcalf

PRODUCTION EDITOR
Luca Frassinetti
PRODUCTION CONTROLLER
Sophie Argyris

001176426Feb/2011
Copyright  2011
Dorling Kindersley Limited
All rights reserved

PRODUCTION MANAGER
Pankaj Sharma
DTP MANAGER/CTS
Balwant Singh
DTP DESIGNERS
Bimlesh Tiwary, Mohammad Usman
DTP OPERATOR
Neeraj Bhatia

styling by

STUDIO8 DESIGN

ILLUSTRATIONS
James Graham
PICTURE RESEARCH
Ria Jones, Myriam Megharbi

11 12 13 14 15 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Without limiting the rights under
copyright reserved above, no part
of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form, or
by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise),
without the prior written permission of
both the copyright owner and the
above publisher of this book.
Published in Great Britain by Dorling
Kindersley Limited.
A catalog record for this book is
available from the Library of Congress.

DK books are available at special
discounts when purchased in bulk
for sales promotions, premiums,
fund-raising, or educational use.
For details, contact: DK Publishing
Special Markets, 375 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014 or
SpecialSales@dk.com.

ISBN 978-0-7566-6861-7
Printed and bound in Singapore
by Star Standard
Discover more at
www.dk.com

CONTRIBUTORS
WILL BUCKINGHAM

JOHN MARENBON

A philosopher, novelist, and lecturer, Will Buckingham
is particularly interested in the interplay of philosophy
and narrative. He currently teaches at De Montfort
University, Leicester, UK, and has written several
books, including Finding our Sea-Legs: Ethics,
Experience and the Ocean of Stories.

A Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, UK,
John Marenbon studies and writes on medieval
philosophy. His books include Early Medieval
Philosophy 4801150: An Introduction.

MARCUS WEEKS
DOUGLAS BURNHAM
A professor of philosophy at Staffordshire University,
UK, Douglas Burnham is the author of many books
and articles on modern and European philosophy.

CLIVE HILL
A lecturer in political theory and British history,
Clive Hill has a particular interest in the role of
the intellectual in the modern world.

PETER J. KING
A doctor of philosophy who lectures at Pembroke
College, University of Oxford, UK, Peter J. King is the
author of the recent book One Hundred Philosophers:
A Guide to the Worlds Greatest Thinkers.

A writer and musician, Marcus Weeks studied
philosophy and worked as a teacher before embarking
on a career as an author. He has contributed to many
books on the arts and popular sciences.

OTHER CONTRIBUTORS
The publishers would also like to thank Richard
Osborne, lecturer of philosophy and critical theory at
Camberwell College of Arts, UK, for his enthusiasm
and assistance in planning this book, and Stephanie
Chilman for her help putting the Directory together.

CONTENTS
10 INTRODUCTION

46

The life which is
unexamined is not
worth living
Socrates

50

Earthly knowledge is
but shadow Plato

56

Truth resides in the world
around us Aristotle

64

Death is nothing to us
Epicurus

The Dao that can be told
is not the eternal Dao
Laozi

66

He has the most who is
most content with the least
Diogenes of Sinope

Number is the ruler
of forms and ideas
Pythagoras

67

THE ANCIENT
WORLD
700 BCE250 CE
22

24

26

30

34

2501500
72

God is not the parent
of evils
St. Augustine of Hippo

74

God foresees our free
thoughts and actions
Boethius

76

The soul is distinct
from the body Avicenna

80

Just by thinking about God
we can know he exists
St. Anselm

Happy is he who has
overcome his ego
Siddhartha Gautama

82

Philosophy and religion
are not incompatible
Averroes

Hold faithfulness and
sincerity as rst principles
Confucius

84

God has no attributes
Moses Maimonides

86

Dont grieve. Anything
you lose comes round in
another form
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi

88

The universe has not
always existed
Thomas Aquinas

96

God is the not-other
Nikolaus von Kues

97

To know nothing is
the happiest life
Desiderius Erasmus

Everything is made
of water
Thales of Miletus

40

Everything is ux
Heraclitus

41

All is one Parmenides

42

Man is the measure of
all things Protagoras

44

When one throws to me
a peach, I return to him
a plum Mozi

45

THE MEDIEVAL
WORLD

Nothing exists except
atoms and empty space
Democritus and Leucippus

The goal of life is living
in agreement with nature
Zeno of Citium

RENAISSANCE
AND THE AGE
OF REASON
15001750

102 The end justies the means

THE AGE OF
REVOLUTION
17501900

146 Doubt is not a pleasant

condition, but certainty
is absurd Voltaire

Niccol Machiavelli
108 Fame and tranquillity

can never be bedfellows
Michel de Montaigne
110 Knowledge is power

148 Custom is the great guide

of human life David Hume
154 Man was born free yet

everywhere he is in chains
Jean-Jacques Rousseau

Francis Bacon
112 Man is a machine

Thomas Hobbes

160 Man is an animal that

makes bargains
Adam Smith

186 Every man takes the limits

of his own eld of vision
for the limits of the world
Arthur Schopenhauer
189 Theology is anthropology

Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach
116 I think therefore I am

Ren Descartes
124 Imagination decides

164 There are two worlds:

our bodies and the
external world
Immanuel Kant

everything Blaise Pascal
126 God is the cause of all

things, which are in him
Benedictus Spinoza
130 No mans knowledge

here can go beyond his
experience John Locke

172 Society is indeed a contract

Edmund Burke
174 The greatest happiness

for the greatest number
Jeremy Bentham
175 Mind has no gender

Mary Wollstonecraft
134 There are two kinds of

truths: truths of reasoning
and truths of fact
Gottfried Leibniz
138 To be is to be perceived

George Berkeley

176 What sort of philosophy

one chooses depends on
what sort of person one is
Johann Gottlieb Fichte
177 About no subject is there

less philosophizing than
about philosophy
Friedrich Schlegel
178 Reality is a historical

process Georg Hegel

190 Over his own body and

mind, the individual
is sovereign
John Stuart Mill
194 Anxiety is the dizziness

of freedom
Sren Kierkegaard
196 The history of all hitherto

existing society is the
history of class struggles
Karl Marx
204 Must the citizen ever

resign his conscience
to the legislator?
Henry David Thoreau
205 Consider what effects

things have
Charles Sanders Peirce
206 Act as if what you do

makes a difference
William James

THE MODERN
WORLD
19001950

214 Man is something to

be surpassed
Friedrich Nietzsche
222 Men with self-condence

come and see and conquer
Ahad Haam
223 Every message is made

of signs
Ferdinand de Saussure
224 Experience by itself is

not science Edmund Husserl
226 Intuition goes in the very

direction of life
Henri Bergson
228 We only think when we are

confronted with problems
John Dewey
232 Those who cannot

remember the past are
condemned to repeat it
George Santayana
233 It is only suffering that

makes us persons
Miguel de Unamuno
234 Believe in life

William du Bois
236 The road to happiness lies

in an organized diminution
of work Bertrand Russell
240 Love is a bridge from

poorer to richer knowledge
Max Scheler

241 Only as an individual can

man become a philosopher
Karl Jaspers
242 Life is a series of collisions

with the future
Jos Ortega y Gasset
244 To philosophize, rst one

must confess
Hajime Tanabe
246 The limits of my language

are the limits of my world
Ludwig Wittgenstein
252 We are ourselves the

entities to be analyzed
Martin Heidegger
256 The individuals only true

moral choice is through
self-sacrice for the
community
Tetsuro Watsuji
257 Logic is the last scientic

ingredient of philosophy
Rudolf Carnap
258 The only way of knowing

a person is to love them
without hope
Walter Benjamin
259 That which is cannot

be true Herbert Marcuse

268 Existence precedes

essence
Jean-Paul Sartre
272 The banality of evil

Hannah Arendt
273 Reason lives in language

Emmanuel Levinas
274 In order to see the world

we must break with our
familiar acceptance of it
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
276 Man is dened as

a human being and
woman as a female
Simone de Beauvoir
278 Language is a social art

Willard Van Orman Quine
260 History does not belong

to us but we belong to it
Hans-Georg Gadamer
262 In so far as a scientic

statement speaks about
reality, it must be
falsiable Karl Popper
266 Intelligence is a moral

category Theodor Adorno

280 The fundamental sense of

freedom is freedom from
chains Isaiah Berlin
282 Think like a mountain

Arne Naess
284 Life will be lived all the

better if it has no meaning
Albert Camus

322 Thought has always

CONTEMPORARY
PHILOSOPHY

worked by opposition
Hlne Cixous

1950PRESENT

323 Who plays God in present-

day feminism?
Julia Kristeva

290 Language is a skin

324 Philosophy is not only

Roland Barthes

a written enterprise
Henry Odera Oruka

292 How would we manage

without a culture?
Mary Midgley

325 In suffering, the animals

are our equals
Peter Singer

293 Normal science does not

aim at novelties of fact
or theory Thomas Kuhn
294 The principles of justice

are chosen behind a veil
of ignorance
John Rawls
296 Art is a form of life

300 For the black man, there

is only one destiny and it
is white Frantz Fanon

Paul Feyerabend
298 Knowledge is produced

to be sold
Jean-Franois Lyotard

analyses are always
analyses of a failure
Slavoj iek

302 Man is an invention of

recent date
Michel Foucault

Richard Wollheim
297 Anything goes

326 All the best Marxist

304 If we choose, we can live

in a world of comforting
illusion Noam Chomsky
306 Society is dependent upon

a criticism of its own
traditions Jrgen Habermas
308 There is nothing outside

of the text
Jacques Derrida
314 There is nothing deep

down inside us except
what we have put there
ourselves Richard Rorty
320 Every desire has a relation

to madness Luce Irigaray
321 Every empire tells itself

and the world that it is
unlike all other empires
Edward Said

330 DIRECTORY
340 GLOSSARY
344 INDEX
351 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

INTRODU

CTION

12 INTRODUCTION

P

hilosophy is not just the
preserve of brilliant but
eccentric thinkers that it is
popularly supposed to be. It is what
everyone does when theyre not
busy dealing with their everyday
business and get a chance simply
to wonder what life and the
universe are all about. We human
beings are naturally inquisitive
creatures, and cant help wondering
about the world around us and our
place in it. Were also equipped with
a powerful intellectual capability,
which allows us to reason as well
as just wonder. Although we may
not realize it, whenever we reason,
were thinking philosophically.
Philosophy is not so much about
coming up with the answers to
fundamental questions as it is
about the process of trying to nd
these answers, using reasoning
rather than accepting without
question conventional views or
traditional authority. The very rst
philosophers, in ancient Greece and
China, were thinkers who were not
satised with the established
explanations provided by religion
and custom, and sought answers
which had rational justications.
And, just as we might share our
views with friends and colleagues,
they discussed their ideas with
one another, and even set up

schools to teach not just the
conclusions they had come to, but
the way they had come to them.
They encouraged their students to
disagree and criticize ideas as a
means of rening them and coming
up with new and different ones. A
popular misconception is that of
the solitary philosopher arriving at
his conclusions in isolation, but this
is actually seldom the case. New
ideas emerge through discussion
and the examination, analysis, and
criticism of other peoples ideas.

Debate and dialogue
The archetypical philosopher in
this respect was Socrates. He
didnt leave any writings, or even

Wonder is very much the
affection of a philosopher;
for there is no other
beginning of philosophy
than this.
Plato

any big ideas as the conclusions of
his thinking. Indeed, he prided
himself on being the wisest of men
because he knew he didnt know
anything. His legacy lay in the
tradition he established of debate
and discussion, of questioning the
assumptions of other people to gain
deeper understanding and elicit
fundamental truths. The writings
of Socrates pupil, Plato, are almost
invariably in the form of dialogues,
with Socrates as a major character.
Many later philosophers also
adopted the device of dialogues
to present their ideas, giving
arguments and counterarguments
rather than a simple statement of
their reasoning and conclusions.
The philosopher who presents
his ideas to the world is liable to
be met with comments beginning
Yes, but ... or What if ... rather
than wholehearted acceptance.
In fact, philosophers have ercely
disagreed with one another about
almost every aspect of philosophy.
Plato and his pupil Aristotle, for
example, held diametrically
opposed views on fundamental
philosophical questions, and their
different approaches have divided
opinions among philosophers ever
since. This has, in turn, provoked
more discussion and prompted yet
more fresh ideas.

INTRODUCTION 13

But how can it be that these
philosophical questions are still
being discussed and debated?
Why havent thinkers come up
with denitive answers? What are
these fundamental questions that
philosophers through the ages have
wrestled with?

Existence and knowledge
When the rst true philosophers
appeared in ancient Greece some
2,500 years ago, it was the world
around them that inspired their
sense of wonder. They saw the
Earth and all the different forms of
life inhabiting it; the sun, moon,
planets, and stars; and natural
phenomena such as the weather,
earthquakes, and eclipses. They
sought explanations for all these
thingsnot the traditional myths
and legends about the gods, but
something that would satisfy their
curiosity and their intellect. The
rst question that occupied these
early philosophers was What is the
universe made of?, which was soon
expanded to become the wider
question of What is the nature
of whatever it is that exists?
This is the branch of philosophy
we now call metaphysics. Although
much of the original question has
since been explained by modern
science, related questions of

metaphysics such as Why is there
something rather than nothing?
are not so simply answered.
Because we, too, exist as a part
of the universe, metaphysics also
considers the nature of human
existence and what it means to be
a conscious being. How do we
perceive the world around us, and
do things exist independently of
our perception? What is the
relationship between our mind and
body, and is there such a thing as
an immortal soul? The area of
metaphysics concerned with
questions of existence, ontology, is
a huge one and forms the basis for
much of Western philosophy.
Once philosophers had started
to put received wisdom to the test
of rational examination, another
fundamental question became
obvious: How can we know? The
study of the nature and limits of
knowledge forms a second main
branch of philosophy, epistemology.
At its heart is the question of
how we acquire knowledge, how
we come to know what we know;
is some (or even all) knowledge
innate, or do we learn everything
from experience? Can we know
something from reasoning alone?
These questions are vital to
philosophical thinking, as we need
to be able to rely on our knowledge

in order to reason correctly. We also
need to determine the scope and
limits of our knowledge. Otherwise
we cannot be sure that we actually
do know what we think we know,
and havent somehow been tricked
into believing it by our senses.

Logic and language
Reasoning relies on establishing
the truth of statements, which can
then be used to build up a train of
thought leading to a conclusion. This
might seem obvious to us now, but
the idea of constructing a rational
argument distinguished philosophy
from the superstitious and religious
explanations that had existed before
the first philosophers. These
thinkers had to devise a way of
ensuring their ideas had validity. 

Superstition sets the
whole world in ames;
philosophy quenches them.
Voltaire

14 INTRODUCTION

What emerged from their thinking
was logic, a technique of reasoning
that was gradually rened over time.
At rst simply a useful tool for
analyzing whether an argument
held water, logic developed rules
and conventions, and soon became
a eld of study in its own right,
another branch of the expanding
subject of philosophy.
Like so much of philosophy,
logic has intimate connections
with science, and mathematics in
particular. The basic structure of
a logical argument, starting from
a premise and working through
a series of steps to a conclusion, is
the same as that of a mathematical
proof. Its not surprising then that
philosophers have often turned to
mathematics for examples of selfevident, incontrovertible truths, nor
that many of the greatest thinkers,
from Pythagoras to Ren Descartes
and Gottfried Leibniz, were also
accomplished mathematicians.
Although logic might seem to
be the most exact and scientic
branch of philosophy, a eld where
things are either right or wrong,
a closer look at the subject shows
that it is not so simple. Advances
in mathematics in the 19th century
called into question the rules of
logic that had been laid down by
Aristotle, but even in ancient times

Zeno of Eleas famous paradoxes
reached absurd conclusions from
apparently faultless arguments.
A large part of the problem is
that philosophical logic, unlike
mathematics, is expressed in words
rather than numbers or symbols,
and is subject to all the ambiguities
and subtleties inherent in language.
Constructing a reasoned argument
involves using language carefully
and accurately, examining our
statements and arguments to make
sure they mean what we think they
mean; and when we study other
peoples arguments, we have to
analyze not only the logical steps
they take, but also the language
they use, to see if their conclusions
hold water. Out of this process came
yet another eld of philosophy that
ourished in the 20th century, the
philosophy of language, which
examined terms and their meanings.

Morality, art, and politics
Because our language is imprecise,
philosophers have attempted to
clarify meanings in their search for
answers to philosophical questions.
The sort of questions that Socrates
asked the citizens of Athens tried
to get to the bottom of what they
actually believed certain concepts
to be. He would ask seemingly
simple questions such as What is

justice? or What is beauty? not
only to elicit meanings, but also to
explore the concepts themselves.
In discussions of this sort, Socrates
challenged assumptions about the
way we live our lives and the things
we consider to be important.
The examination of what it
means to lead a good life, what
concepts such as justice and
happiness actually mean and how
we can achieve them, and how we
should behave, forms the basis for
the branch of philosophy known as
ethics (or moral philosophy); and the
related branch stemming from the
question of what constitutes beauty
and art is known as aesthetics.

O philosophy, lifes guide!
O searcher-out of virtue
and expeller of vices!
What could we and every
age of men have been
without thee?
Cicero

INTRODUCTION 15

From considering ethical questions
about our individual lives, it is a
natural step to start thinking about
the sort of society we would like to
live inhow it should be governed,
the rights and responsibilities of
its citizens, and so on. Political
philosophy, the last of the major
branches of philosophy, deals with
these ideas, and philosophers have
come up with models of how they
believe society should be organized,
ranging from Platos Republic to
Karl Marxs Communist Manifesto.

Religion: East and West
The various branches of philosophy
are not only interlinked, but overlap
considerably, and it is sometimes
difcult to say in which area a
particular idea falls. Philosophy also
encroaches on many completely
different subjects, including the
sciences, history, and the arts. With
its beginnings in questioning the
dogmas of religion and superstition,
philosophy also examines religion
itself, specically asking questions
such as Does god exist? and Do
we have an immortal soul? These
are questions that have their roots
in metaphysics, but they have
implications in ethics too. For
example, some philosophers have
asked whether our morality comes
from god or whether it is a purely

human constructand this in turn
has raised the whole debate as to
what extent humanity has free will.
In the Eastern philosophies
that evolved in China and India
(particularly Daoism and Buddhism)
the lines between philosophy and
religion are less clear, at least to
Western ways of thinking. This
marks one of the major differences
between Western and Eastern
philosophies. Although Eastern
philosophies are not generally a
result of divine revelation or
religious dogma, they are often
intricately linked with what we
would consider matters of faith.
Even though philosophical
reasoning is frequently used to
justify faith in the Judeo-Christian
and Islamic world, faith and belief

There is nothing either
good or bad, but thinking
makes it so.
William Shakespeare

form an integral part of Eastern
philosophy that has no parallel in
the West. Eastern and Western
philosophy also differ in their
starting points. Where the ancient
Greeks posed metaphysical
questions, the rst Chinese
philosophers considered these
adequately dealt with by religion,
and instead concerned themselves
with moral and political philosophy.

Following the reasoning
Philosophy has provided us with
some of the most important and
inuential ideas in history. What
this book presents is a collection
of ideas from the best-known
philosophers, encapsulated in well
known quotes and pithy summaries
of their ideas. Perhaps the bestknown quotation in philosophy is
Descartes cogito, ergo sum (often
translated from the Latin as I think,
therefore I am). It ranks as one of
the most important ideas in the
history of philosophy, and is widely
considered a turning point in
thinking, leading us into the modern
era. On its own however, the
quotation doesnt mean much. It is
the conclusion of a line of argument
about the nature of certainty, and
only when we examine the
reasoning leading to it does the
idea begin to make sense. And 

16 INTRODUCTION

its only when we see where
Descartes took the ideawhat the
consequences of that conclusion
arethat we see its importance.
Many of the ideas in this book
may seem puzzling at rst glance.
Some may appear self-evident,
others paradoxical or ying in the
face of common sense. They might
even appear to prove Bertrand
Russells ippant remark that the
point of philosophy is to start with
something so simple as not to seem
worth stating, and to end with
something so paradoxical that no
one will believe it. So why are
these ideas important?

Systems of thought
Sometimes the theories presented
in this book were the rst of their
kind to appear in the history of
thought. While their conclusions
may seem obvious to us now, in
hindsight, they were startlingly
new in their time, and despite their
apparent simplicity, they may make
us reexamine things that we take
for granted. The theories presented
here that seem to be paradoxes and
counter-intuitive statements are the
ideas that really call into question
our assumptions about ourselves
and the worldand they also make
us think in new ways about how
we see things. There are many

ideas here that raise issues that
philosophers still puzzle over.
Some ideas may relate to other
thoughts and theories in different
elds of the same philosophers
thinking, or have come from an
analysis or criticism of another
philosophers work. These latter
ideas form part of a line of
reasoning that may extend over
several generations or even
centuries, or be the central idea of
a particular school of philosophy.
Many of the great philosophers
formed integrated systems of
philosophy with interconnecting
ideas. For example, their opinions
about how we acquire knowledge
led to a particular metaphysical
view of the universe and mans
soul. This in turn has implications
for what kind of life the philosopher
believes we should lead and what
type of society would be ideal. And
in turn, this entire system of ideas
has been the starting point for
subsequent philosophers.
We must remember too that
these ideas never quite become
outdated. They still have much to
tell us, even when their conclusions
have been proved wrong by
subsequent philosophers and
scientists. In fact, many ideas that
had been dismissed for centuries
were later to be proved startlingly

prescientthe theories of the
ancient Greek atomists for example.
More importantly, these thinkers
established the processes of
philosophy, ways of thinking and
organizing our thoughts. We must
remember that these ideas are only
a small part of a philosophers
thinkingusually the conclusion
to a longer line of reasoning.

Science and society
These ideas spread their inuence
beyond philosophy too. Some have
spawned mainstream scientic,
political, or artistic movements.
Often the relationship between
science and philosophy is a backand-forth affair, with ideas from one
informing the other. Indeed, there
is a whole branch of philosophy
that studies the thinking behind

Scepticism is the rst
step towards truth.
Denis Diderot

INTRODUCTION 17

scientic methods and practices.
The development of logical thinking
affected how math evolved and
became the basis for the scientic
method, which relies on systematic
observation to explain the world.
Ideas about the nature of the self
and consciousness have developed
into the science of psychology.
The same is true of philosophys
relationship with society. Ethics of
all sorts found adherents in political
leaders throughout history, shaping
the societies we live in today, and
even prompting revolutions. The
ethical decisions made in all kinds
of professions have moral dimensions
that are informed by the ideas of
the great thinkers of philosophy.

Behind the ideas
The ideas in this book have come
from people living in societies and
cultures which have shaped those
ideas. As we examine the ideas, we
get a picture of certain national and
regional characteristics, as well as
a avor of the times they lived in.
The philosophers presented here
emerge as distinct personalities
some thinkers are optimistic, others
pessimistic; some are meticulous
and painstaking, others think in
broad sweeps; some express
themselves in clear, precise
language, others in a poetic way,

and still more in dense, abstract
language that takes time to unpick.
If you read these ideas in the
original texts, you will not only
agree or disagree with the what
they say, and follow the reasoning
by which they reached their
conclusions, but also get a feeling
of what kind of person is behind it.
You might, for example, warm to
the witty and charming Hume,
appreciating his beautifully clear
prose, while not altogether feeling
at home with what he has to say; or
nd Schopenhauer both persuasive
and a delight to read, while getting
the distinct feeling that he was not
a particularly likeable man.
Above all these thinkers were
(and still are) interesting and
stimulating. The best were also
great writers too, and reading
their original writings can be as
rewarding as reading literature; we
can appreciate not just their literary
style, but also their philosophical
style, the way they present their
arguments. As well as being
thought-provoking, it can be as
uplifting as great art, as elegant as
a mathematical proof, and as witty
as an after-dinner speaker.
Philosophy is not simply about
ideasits a way of thinking. There
are frequently no right or wrong
answers, and different philosophers

often come to radically different
conclusions in their investigations
into questions that science cannot
and religion does notexplain.

Enjoying philosophy
If wonder and curiosity are human
attributes, so too are the thrill of
exploration and the joy of discovery.
We can gain the same sort of
buzz from philosophy that we
might get from physical activity,
and the same pleasure that we
enjoy from an appreciating the arts.
Above all, we gain the satisfaction
of arriving at beliefs and ideas that
are not handed down or forced upon
us by society, teachers, religion, or
even philosophers, but through our
own individual reasoning. 

The beginning of thought
is in disagreementnot
only with others but also
with ourselves.
Eric Hoffer

THE ANC
WORLD
700 250
BCE

CE

IENT

20 INTRODUCTION
Thales of Miletus,
the rst known Greek
philosopher, seeks
rational answers
to questions about
the world we live in.

Traditional date of
birth of Kong Fuzi
(Confucius), whose
philosophy is centered
on respect and
tradition.

Death of Siddhartha
Gautama, the Buddha,
founder of the religion and
philosophy of Buddhism.

Empedocles proposes
his theory of the four
Classical elements;
he is the last Greek
philosopher to record
his ideas in verse.

624546 BCE

551 BCE

480 BCE

C.460 BCE

F

569 BCE

508 BCE

469 BCE

404 BCE

Birth of Pythagoras,
the Greek thinker who
combined philosophy
and mathematics.

The powerful Greek
city-state of Athens
adopts a democratic
constitution.

Birth of Socrates, whose
methods of questioning
in Athens formed the
basis for much of later
Western philosophy.

Defeat in the
Peloponnesian
War leads to the
decline of Athens
political power.

rom the beginning of human
history, people have asked
questions about the world
and their place within it. For early
societies, the answers to the most
fundamental questions were found
in religion: the actions of the gods
explained the workings of the
universe, and provided a framework
for human civilizations.
Some people, however, found the
traditional religious explanations
inadequate, and they began to
search for answers based on reason
rather than convention or religion.
This shift marked the birth of
philosophy, and the rst of the great
thinkers that we know of was Thales
of MiletusMiletus was a Greek
settlement in modern-day Turkey.
Thales used reason to inquire into
the nature of the universe, and
encouraged others to do likewise.

He passed on to his followers not
only his answers, but the process
of thinking rationally, together with
an idea of what kind of explanations
could be considered satisfactory.
For this reason Thales is generally
regarded as the rst philosopher.
The main concern of the early
philosophers centered around
Thales basic question: What is
the world made of? Their answers
form the foundations of scientic
thought, and forged a relationship
between science and philosophy
that still exists today. The work of
Pythagoras marked a key turning
point, as he sought to explain the
world not in terms of primal matter,
but in terms of mathematics. He and
his followers described the
structure of the cosmos in numbers
and geometry. Although some of
these mathematical relationships

acquired mystical signicance for
Pythagoras and his followers, their
numerical explanation of the cosmos
had a profound inuence on the
beginnings of scientic thought.

Classical Greek philosophy
As the Greek city-states grew in
stature, philosophy spread across
the Greek world from Ionia, and in
particular to Athens, which was
rapidly becoming the cultural
center of Greece. It was here that
philosophers broadened the scope of
philosophy to include new questions,
such as How do we know what we
know? and How should we live
our lives? It was an Athenian,
Socrates, who ushered in the short
but hugely inuential period of
Classical Greek philosophy. Although
he left no writings, his ideas were so
important that they steered the

THE ANCIENT WORLD 21

Plato founds his
hugely inuential
Academy in
Athens.

Zeno of Citium
formulates his stoic
philosophy, which
goes on to nd favor
in the Roman Empire.

Ptolemy, a Roman
citizen of Egypt,
proposes the idea that
Earth is at the center
of the universe and
does not move.

Galen of Pergamum
produces extraordinary
medical research that
remains unsurpassed until
the work of Vesalius in 1543.

C.385 BCE

C.332265 BCE

C.100178 CE

C.150 BCE

335 BCE

323 BCE

122 CE

220 CE

Aristotle, Platos
student, opens his own
school in Athensthe
Lyceum.

The death of Alexander
the Great signals the end
of the cultural and political
dominance of Greece in
the ancient world.

Construction begins
on Hadrians Wall in
Britain, marking the
northernmost border
of the Roman Empire.

The collapse of the
Han Dynasty
marks the end of
a unied China.
The Period of
Disunity begins.

future course of philosophy, and
all philosophers before him became
known as the pre-socratics. His pupil
Plato founded a philosophical school
in Athens called the Academy (from
which the word academic derives)
where he taught and developed his
masters ideas, passing them on to
students such as Aristotle, who was
a pupil and teacher there for 20 years.
The contrasting ideas and methods
of these great thinkersSocrates,
Plato, and Aristotleform the basis
of Western philosophy as we know
it today, and their differences of
opinion have continued to divide
philosophers throughout history.
The Classical period of ancient
Greece effectively came to an end
with the death of Alexander the
Great in 323 BCE. This great leader
had unied Greece, and Greek citystates that had worked together

once again became rivals. Following
the death of Aristotle in 322 BCE,
philosophy also divided into very
different schools of thought, as the
cynics, sceptics, epicureans, and
stoics argued their positions.
Over the next couple of centuries,
Greek culture waned as the Roman
Empire grew. The Romans had
little time for Greek philosophy
apart from stoicism, but Greek
ideas persisted, mainly because
they were preserved in the
manuscripts and translations of
the Arab world. They resurfaced
later, during medieval times, with
the rise of Christianity and Islam.

Eastern philosophies
Thinkers throughout Asia were also
questioning conventional wisdom.
Political upheaval in China from
771 to 481 BCE led to a collection of

philosophies that were less
concerned with the nature of
the universe than with how best
to organize a just society and
provide moral guidelines for the
individuals within it; in the process
examining what constitutes a
good life. The so-called Hundred
Schools of Thought ourished in
this period, and the most signicant
of these were Confucianism and
Daoism, both of which continued
to dominate Chinese philosophy
until the 20th century.
To the south of China an equally
inuential philosopher appeared:
Siddhartha Gautama, later known
as the Buddha. From his teaching
in northern India around 500 BCE,
his philosophy spread across the
subcontinent and over most of
southern Asia, where it is still
widely practiced. 

22

EVERYTHING
IS MADE
OF WATER

THALES OF MILETUS (C.624546 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Monism
BEFORE
2500900 BCE The Minoan
civilization in Crete and the
later Mycenaean civilization
in Greece rely on religion to
explain physical phenomena.
c.1100 BCE The Babylonian
creation myth, Enma Eli,
describes the primal state of
the world as a watery mass.
c.700 BCE Theogony by the
Greek poet Hesiod relates how
the gods created the universe.
AFTER
Early 5th century BCE
Empedocles proposes the four
basic elements of the cosmos:
earth, water, air, and re.
c.400 BCE Leucippus and
Democritus conclude that the
cosmos is made up solely of
atoms and empty space.

From observation, Thales deduced that specic
weather conditions, not appeals to the gods, led to a good
harvest. Predicting a high yield of olives one year, he is
said to have bought up all the local olive presses, then
proted by renting them out to meet increased demand.

D

uring the Archaic period
(mid-8th6th century BCE),
the peoples of the Greek
peninsula gradually settled into a
group of city-states. They developed
an alphabetical system of writing,
as well as the beginnings of what
is now recognized as Western
philosophy. Previous civilizations
had relied on religion to explain
phenomena in the world around
them; now a new breed of thinkers
emerged, who attempted to nd
natural, rational explanations.
The rst of these new scientic
thinkers that we are aware of was
Thales of Miletus. Nothing survives
of his writings, but we know that
he had a good grasp of geometry
and astronomy, and is reputed to

have predicted the total eclipse of
the sun in 585 BCE. This practical
turn of mind led him to believe that
events in the world were not due to
supernatural intervention, but had
natural causes that reason and
observation would reveal.

Fundamental substance
Thales needed to establish a rst
principle from which to work, so
he posed the question, What is
the basic material of the cosmos?
The idea that everything in the
universe can be ultimately reduced
to a single substance is the theory
of monism, and Thales and his
followers were the rst to propose
it within Western philosophy.
Thales reasons that the fundamental

THE ANCIENT WORLD 23
See also: Anaximander 330  Anaximenes of Miletus 330  Pythagoras 2629
Empedocles 330  Democritus and Leucippus 45  Aristotle 5663



What is the basic
material of the cosmos?

It must be

Thales of Miletus

something
from which
everything
can be formed.

essential
to life.

capable
of motion.

capable
of change.

Everything is
made of water.

material of the universe had to be
something out of which everything
else could be formed, as well as
being essential to life, and capable
of motion and therefore of change.
He observes that water is clearly
necessary to sustain all forms of
life, and that it moves and changes,
assuming different forms  from
liquid to solid ice and vaporous
mist. So Thales concludes that all
matter, regardless of its apparent
properties, must be water in some
stage of transformation.
Thales also notes that every
landmass appears to come to an
end at the waters edge. From this
he deduces that the whole of the
earth must be oating on a bed of
water, from which it has emerged.

When anything occurs to cause
ripples or tremors in this water,
Thales states, we experience
them as earthquakes.
However, as interesting as
the details of Thales theories are,
they are not the main reason why
he is considered a major gure in
the history of philosophy. His true
importance lies in the fact that he
was the rst known thinker to seek
naturalistic, rational answers to
fundamental questions, rather than
to ascribe objects and events to the
whims of capricious gods. By doing
so, he and the later philosophers
of the Milesian School laid the
foundations for future scientic
and philosophical thought across
the Western world. 

Although we know that
Thales was born and lived in
Miletus, on the coast of what
is now Turkey, we know very
little about his life. None of his
writings, if indeed he left any,
have survived. However, his
reputation as one of the key
early Greek thinkers seems
deserved, and he is referred
to in some detail by both
Aristotle and Diogenes
Laertius, the 3rd-century
biographer of the ancient
Greek philosophers.
Anecdotal evidence
suggests that as well as
being a philosopher, Thales
was actively involved in
politics and was a very
successful businessman. He
is thought to have traveled
widely around the eastern
Mediterranean, and while
visiting Egypt, to have learned
the practical geometry that
was to become the basis of his
deductive reasoning.
However, Thales was
above all a teacher, the rst of
the so-called Milesian School
of philosophers. Anaximander,
his pupil, expanded his
scientic theories, and in
turn became a mentor to
Anaximenes, who is believed
to have taught the young
mathematician Pythagoras.

24

THE DAO THAT CAN
BE TOLD IS NOT
THE
ETERNAL
DAO
LAOZI ( .6TH CENTURY )
C

IN CONTEXT
TRADITION
Chinese philosophy
APPROACH
Daoism
BEFORE
16001046 BCE During the
Shang Dynasty, people believe
fate is controlled by deities and
practice ancestor worship.
1045256 BCE Under the Zhou
Dynasty, the Mandate of
Heaven (god-given authority)
justies political decisions.
AFTER
5th century BCE Confucius
(Kong Fuzi) sets out his rules
for personal development and
for ethical government.
4th century BCE Philosopher
Zhuangzi moves the focus of
Daoist teaching more toward
the actions of the individual,
rather than those of the state.
3rd century CE Scholars Wang
Bi and Guo Xiang create a
Neo-Daoist school.

I

BCE

n the 6th century BCE, China
moved toward a state of
internal warfare as the ruling
Zhou Dynasty disintegrated. This
change bred a new social class of
administrators and magistrates
within the courts, who occupied
themselves with the business of
devising strategies for ruling more
effectively. The large body of ideas

The source of
all existence.

that was produced by these ofcials
became known as the Hundred
Schools of Thought.
All this coincided with the
emergence of philosophy in Greece,
and shared some of its concerns,
such as seeking stability in a
constantly changing world, and
alternatives to what had previously
been prescribed by religion. But

Dao
(the Way)

The root of
all things, seen
and unseen.

is achieved
through
Acting
thoughtfully,
not impulsively.

A solitary
life of meditation
and reection.

wu wei
(non-action).
Living in peace,
simplicity, and
tranquility.

Acting in
harmony
with nature.

THE ANCIENT WORLD 25
See also: Siddhartha Gautama 3033

Chinese philosophy evolved from
practical politics and was therefore
concerned with morality and ethics
rather than the nature of the cosmos.
One of the most important ideas
to appear at this time came from
the Daode jing (The Way and its
Power), which has been attributed
to Laozi (Lao Tzu). It was one of the
rst attempts to propose a theory
of just rule, based on de (virtue),

Living in harmony with nature is
one path the Daode jing prescribes for
a well-balanced life. For this man that
could mean respecting the ecological
balance of the lake and not over-shing.

Laozi



Confucius 3439



Mozi 44



Wang Bi 331



Hajime Tanabe 24445

which could be found by following
dao (the Way), and forms the basis
of the philosophy known as Daoism.

Cycles of change
In order to understand the concept
of dao, it is necessary to know how
the ancient Chinese viewed the
ever-changing world. For them, the
changes are cyclical, continually
moving from one state to another,
such as from night to day, summer
to winter, and so on. They saw the
different states not as opposites,
but as related, one arising from the
other. These states also possess
complementary properties that
together make up a whole. The
process of change is seen as an
expression of dao, and leads to the
10,000 manifestations that make up
the world. Laozi, in the Daode jing,
says that humans are merely one
of these 10,000 manifestations and
have no special status. But because
of our desire and free will, we can
stray from the dao, and disturb the
worlds harmonious balance. To live
a virtuous life means acting in
accordance with the dao.
So little is known for certain about
the author of the Daode jing, who
is traditionally assumed to be
Laozi (Lao Tzu). He has become
an almost mythical gure; it has
even been suggested that the
book was not by Laozi, but is in
fact a compilation of sayings by a
number of scholars. What we do
know is that there was a scholar
born in the state of Chu, with the
name Li Er or Lao Tan, during
the Zhou dynasty, who became
known as Laozi (the Old Master).
Several texts indicate that he was
an archivist at the Zhou court, and
that Confucius consulted him on

Knowing others
is intelligence; knowing
yourself is true wisdom.
Laozi

Following the dao, however, is not
a simple matter, as the Daode jing
acknowledges. Philosophizing
about dao is pointless, as it is
beyond anything that humans can
conceive of. It is characterized by
wu (not-being), so we can only
live according to the dao by wu
wei, literally non-action. By this
Laozi does not mean not doing,
but acting in accordance with
naturespontaneously and
intuitively. That in turn entails
acting without desire, ambition,
or recourse to social conventions. 
rituals and ceremonies. Legend
states that Laozi left the court
as the Zhou dynasty declined,
and journeyed west in search
of solitude. As he was about to
cross the border, one of the
guards recognized him and
asked for a record of his wisdom.
Laozi wrote the Daode jing for
him, and then continued on his
way, never to be seen again.
Key works
c.6th century BCE
Daode jing (also known
as the Laozi)

26

NUMBER IS
THE RULER
OF FORMS
AND IDEAS
PYTHAGORAS (C.570495 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Pythagoreanism
BEFORE
6th century BCE Thales
proposes a non-religious
explanation of the cosmos.
AFTER
c.535c.475 BCE Heraclitus
dismisses Pythagoreanism
and says that the cosmos is
governed by change.
c.428 BCE Plato introduces
his concept of perfect Forms,
which are revealed to the
intellect and not the senses.
c.300 BCE Euclid, a Greek
mathematician, establishes
the principles of geometry.
1619 German mathematician
Johannes Kepler describes the
relationship between geometry
and physical phenomena.

W

estern philosophy was
in its infancy when
Pythagoras was born.
In Miletus, Greece, a group of
philosophers known collectively as
the Milesian School had started to
seek rational explanations for natural
phenomena only a generation or so
earlier, marking the beginning of
the Western philosophical tradition.
Pythagoras spent his childhood not
far from Miletus, so it is very likely
that he knew of them, and may
even have studied in their academy.
Like Thales, the founder of the
Milesian School, Pythagoras is
said to have learnt the rudiments
of geometry during a trip to Egypt.
With this background, it is not

THE ANCIENT WORLD 27
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223

Everything in the
universe conforms
to mathematical
rules and ratios.



Siddhartha Gautama 3033

So if we
understand number
and mathematical
relationships...

Number is the
ruler of forms.

surprising that he should approach
philosophical thinking in a
scientic and mathematical way.

The Pythagorean academy
Pythagoras was also, however, a
deeply religious and superstitious
man. He believed in reincarnation
and the transmigration of souls, and
he established a religious cult, with
himself cast as a virtual messiah, in
Croton, southern Italy. His disciples
lived in a collective commune,

Pythagoras



Heraclitus 40



Plato 5055

...we come to
understand the
structure of
the cosmos.



Ren Descartes 11623

Mathematics is
the key model
for philosophical
thought.

Number is the
ruler of ideas.

following strict behavioral and
dietary rules, while studying his
religious and philosophical theories.
The Pythagoreans, as his disciples
were known, saw his ideas as
mystical revelations, to the extent
that some of the discoveries
attributed to him as revelations
may in fact have come from others
in the community. His ideas were
recorded by his students, who
included his wife, Theano of Crotona,
and daughters. The two sides of

Pythagorass beliefsthe mystical
and the scienticseem to be
irreconcilable, but Pythagoras
himself does not see them as
contradictory. For him, the goal
of life is freedom from the cycle
of reincarnation, which can be
gained by adhering to a strict
set of behavioral rules, and by
contemplation, or what we would
call objective scientic thinking.
In geometry and mathematics he
found truths that he regarded 

Little is known about Pythagorass
life. He left no writings himself,
and unfortunately, as the Greek
philosopher Porphyry noted in his
Vita Pythagorae, No one knows
for certain what Pythagoras told
his associates, since they observed
an unusual silence. However,
modern scholars believe that
Pythagoras was probably born on
the island of Samos, off the coast
of modern-day Turkey. As a young
man, he travelled widely, perhaps
studying at the Milesian School,
and probably visiting Egypt, which
was a centrer of learning. At
the age of about 40, he set up a

community of around 300 people
in Croton, southern Italy. Its
members studied a mixture of
mystical and academic studies,
and despite its collective nature,
Pythagoras was clearly the
communitys leader. At the age
of 60, he is said to have married
a young girl, Theano of Crotona.
Growing hostility toward the
Pythagorean cult eventually
forced him to leave Croton, and
he ed to Metapontum, also in
southern Italy, where he died
soon after. His community had
virtually disappeared by the end
of the 4th century BCE.

28 PYTHAGORAS
Pythagorass Theorem showed that shapes
and ratios are governed by principles that
can be discovered. This suggested that it
might be possible, in time, to work out the
structure of the entire cosmos.

c2
b2

There is geometry in
the humming of the strings,
there is music in the
spacing of the spheres.
Pythagoras

b c
a

a2

a2

+

2

b

as self-evident, as if god-given, and
worked out mathematical proofs that
had the impact of divine revelation.
Because these mathematical
discoveries were a product of pure
reasoning, Pythagoras believes
they are more valuable than mere
observations. For example, the
Egyptians had discovered that a
triangle whose sides have ratios of
3:4:5 always has a right angle, and
this was useful in practice, such as
in architecture. But Pythagoras
uncovered the underlying principle
behind all right-angled triangles
(that the square of the hypotenuse
equals the sum of the squares of the
other two sides) and found it to be
universally true. This discovery was
so extraordinary, and held such
potential, that the Pythagoreans
took it to be divine revelation.
Pythagoras concludes that the
whole cosmos must be governed
by mathematical rules. He says

=

c2

that number (numerical ratios and
mathematical axioms) can be used
to explain the very structure of the
cosmos. He does not totally dismiss
the Milesian idea that the universe
is made up of one fundamental
substance, but he shifts the enquiry
from substance to form.
This was such a profound change
in the way of looking at the world,
that we should probably forgive
Pythagoras and his disciples for
getting somewhat carried away,
and giving numbers a mystical
signicance. Through exploring the
relationship between numbers and
geometry, they discoved the square
numbers and cube numbers that
we speak of today, but they also
attributed characteristics to them,
such as good to the even numbers
and evil to the odd ones, and even
specics such as justice to the
number four, and so on. The number
ten, in the form of the tetractys (a

triangular shape made up of rows of
dots) had a particular signicance
in Pythagorean ritual. Less
contentiously, they saw the number
one as a single point, a unity, from
which other things could be derived.
The number two, in this way of
thinking, was a line, number three a
surface or plane, and four a solid; the
correspondence with our modern
concept of dimensions is obvious.
The Pythagorean explanation of
the creation of the universe followed
a mathematical pattern: on the
Unlimited (the innite that existed
before the universe), God imposed a
Limit, so that all that exists came to
have an actual size. In this way God
created a measurable unity from
which everything else was formed.

Numerical harmonies
Pythagorass most important
discovery was the relationships
between numbers: the ratios and
proportions. This was reinforced by
his investigations into music, and
in particular into the relationships
between notes that sounded pleasant
together. The story goes that he
rst stumbled onto this idea when
listening to blacksmiths at work. One
had an anvil half the size of the other,
and the sounds they made when

THE ANCIENT WORLD 29
hit with a hammer were exactly an
octave (eight notes) apart. While
this may be true, it was probably by
experimenting with a plucked string
that Pythagoras determined the
ratios of the consonant intervals
(the number of notes between two
notes that determines whether they
will sound harmonious if struck
together). What he discovered was
that these intervals were harmonious
because the relationship between
them was a precise and simple
mathematical ratio. This series,
which we now know as the harmonic
series, conrmed for him that the
elegance of the mathematics he had
found in abstract geometry also
existed in the natural world.

The stars and elements
Pythagoras had now proved not
only that the structure of the
universe can be explained in
mathemathical termsnumber
is the ruler of formsbut also
that acoustics is an exact science,
and number governs harmonious
proportions. He then started to
apply his theories to the whole
cosmos, demonstrating the
harmonic relationship of the stars,
planets, and elements. His idea
of harmonic relationships between
the stars was eagerly taken up
by medieval and Renaissance
astronomers, who developed whole
theories around the idea of the music
of the spheres, and his suggestion
that the elements were arranged
harmoniously was revisited over
2,000 years after his death. In 1865
English chemist John Newlands
discovered that when the chemical
elements are arranged according to
Classical architecture follows
Pythagorean mathematical ratios.
Harmonious shapes and ratios are used
throughout, scaled down in the smaller
parts, and up for the overall structure.

atomic weight, those with similar
properties occur at every eighth
element, like notes of music. This
discovery became known as the
Law of Octaves, and it helped lead
to the development of the Periodic
Law of chemical elements still
used today.
Pythagoras also established the
principle of deductive reasoning,
which is the step-by-step process
of starting with self-evident axioms
(such as 2 + 2 = 4) to build toward
a new conclusion or fact. Deductive
reasoning was later rened by
Euclid, and it formed the basis
of mathematical thinking into
medieval times and beyond.
One of Pythagorass most
important contributions to the
development of philosophy was
the idea that abstract thinking
is superior to the evidence of the
senses. This was taken up by
Plato in his theory of Forms, and
resurfaced in the philosophical
method of the rationalists in the
17th century. The Pythagorean
attempt to combine the rational
with the religious was the rst

Reason is immortal,
all else mortal.
Pythagoras

attempt to grapple with a problem
that has dogged philosophy and
religion in some ways ever since.
Almost everything we know
about Pythagoras comes to us from
others; even the bare facts of his life
are largely conjecture. Yet he has
achieved a near-legendary status
(which he apparently encouraged) for
the ideas attributed to him. Whether
or not he was in fact the originator
of these ideas does not really matter;
what is important is their profound
effect on philosophical thought. 

30

HAPPY IS
HE WHO HAS
OVERCOME
HIS EGO
SIDDHARTHA GAUTAMA (C.563483 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
TRADITION
Eastern philosophy
APPROACH
Buddhism
BEFORE
c.1500 BCE Vedism reaches
the Indian subcontinent.
c.10th5th centuries BCE
Brahmanism replaces
Vedic beliefs.
AFTER
3rd century BCE Buddhism
spreads from the Ganges
valley westward across India.
1st century BCE The
teachings of Siddhartha
Gautama are written down
for the rst time.
1st century CE Buddhism
starts to spread to China
and Southeast Asia. Different
schools of Buddhism begin
to evolve in different areas.

S

iddhartha Gautama, later
known as the Buddha, the
enlightened one, lived in
India during a period when religious
and mythological accounts of the
world were being questioned. In
Greece, thinkers such as Pythagoras
were examining the cosmos using
reason, and in China, Laozi and
Confucius were detaching ethics
from religious dogma. Brahmanism,
a religion that had evolved from
Vedisman ancient belief based
on the sacred Veda textswas
the dominant faith in the Indian
subcontinent in the 6th century BCE,
and Siddhartha Gautama was the
rst to challenge its teachings with
philosophical reasoning.

THE ANCIENT WORLD 31
See also: Laozi 2425  Pythagoras 2629  Confucius 3439 
David Hume 14853  Arthur Schopenhauer 186188  Hajime Tanabe 24445

The Four Noble Truths
inherent part off
existence from birth, through
sickness and old age, to death.

The truth of suffering
(Dukkha)

The cause of suffering is
desire: craving for sensual
pleasures and attachment to
worldly possessions and power.

The truth of
the origin of suffering
(Samudaya)

Suffering can be ended
by detaching oneself from
craving and attachment.

The truth of the
ending of suffering
(Nirodha)

The Eightfold Path is the
means to eliminate desire and
overcome the ego.

The truth of the path
to the ending of
suffering (Magga)

Gautama, although revered by
Buddhists for his wisdom, was
neither a messiah nor a prophet,
and he did not act as a medium
between God and Man. His ideas
were arrived at through reasoning,
not divine revelation, and it is this
that marks Buddhism out as a
philosophy as much as (perhaps
even more than) a religion. His
quest was philosophicalto
discover truthsand he
maintained that these truths are
available to all of us through the
power of reason. Like most Eastern
philosophers, he was not interested
in the unanswerable questions of
metaphysics that preoccupied the
Greeks. Dealing with entities

beyond our experience, this kind of
enquiry was senseless speculation.
Instead, he concerned himself with
the question of the goal of life,
which in turn involved examining
the concepts of happiness, virtue,
and the good life.

The middle way
In his early life, Gautama enjoyed
luxury and, we are told, all the
sensual pleasures. However, he
realized that these were not enough
on their own to bring him true
happiness. He was acutely aware
of the suffering in the world, and
saw that it was largely due to
sickness, old age, and death, and
the fact that people lack what 

Siddhartha Gautama
Almost all we know of
Siddhartha Gautamas life
comes from biographies
written by his followers
centuries after his death, and
which differ widely in many
details. What is certain is
that he was born in Lumbini,
modern-day Nepal, some time
around 560 BCE. His father
was an ofcial, possibly
the leader of a clan, and
Siddhartha led a privileged
life of luxury and high status.
Dissatised with this,
Siddhartha left his wife and
son to nd a spiritual path,
and discovered the middle
way between sensual
indulgence and asceticism.
He experienced enlightenment
while thinking in the shade of
a bodhi tree, and devoted the
rest of his life to traveling
throughout India, preaching.
After his death, his teachings
were passed down orally for
some 400 years before being
written down in the Tipitaka
(Three Baskets).
Key works
1st century CE
Tipitaka (recounted by
his followers), comprising:
Vinaya-pitaka, Sutta-pitaka,
Abhidhamma-pitaka

32

SIDDHARTHA GAUTAMA
may bring short-term gratication,
but not happiness in the sense of
contentment and peace of mind.

The not-self

The Buddha cut off his hair as part of
his renunciation of the material world.
According to Buddhist teaching, the
temptations of the world are the source
of all suffering, and must be resisted.

they need. He also recognized that
the sensual pleasure we indulge
in to relieve suffering is rarely
satisfying, and that when it is, the
effects are transitory. He found the
experience of extreme asceticism
(austerity and abstinence) equally
dissatisfying, bringing him no
nearer to an understanding of how
to achieve happiness.
Gautama came to the conclusion
that there must be a middle way
between self-indulgence and selfmortication. This middle way,
he believed, should lead to true
happiness, or enlightenment,
and to nd it he applied reason
to his own experiences.
Suffering, he realized, is
universal. It is an integral part of
existence, and the root cause of our
suffering is the frustration of our
desires and expectations. These
desires he calls attachments, and
they include not only our sensual
desires and worldly ambitions,
but our most basic instinct for
self-preservation. Satisfying
these attachments, he argues,

The next step in Gautamas
reasoning is that the elimination
of attachments will prevent any
disappointment, and so avoid
suffering. To achieve this, he
suggests a root cause of our
attachmentsour selshness,
and by selshness he means more
than just our tendency to seek
gratication. For Gautama,
selshness is self-centeredness
and self-attachmentthe domain
of what today we would call the
ego. So, to free ourselves from
attachments that cause us pain,
it is not enough merely to renounce
the things we desirewe must
overcome our attachment to that
which desiresthe self.
But how can this be done?
Desire, ambition, and expectation
are part of our nature, and for
most of us constitute our very
reasons for living. The answer,
for Gautama, is that the egos
world is illusoryas he shows,
again, by a process of reasoning.
He argues that nothing in the
universe is self-caused, for
everything is the result of some
previous action, and each of us is
only a transitory part of this eternal
processultimately impermanent
and without substance. So, in
reality, there is no self that is not
part of the greater wholeor the
not-selfand suffering results
from our failure to recognize this.
This does not mean that we should
deny our existence or personal
identity, rather that we should
understand them for what they
aretransient and insubstantial.
Grasping the concept of being a
constituent part of an eternal notself, rather than clinging to the

Believe nothing,
no matter where you
read it, or who said it,
unless it agrees with
your own reason.
Siddhartha Gautama

notion of being a unique self, is
the key to losing that attachment,
and nding a release from suffering.

The Eightfold Path
Gautamas reasoning from the
causes of suffering to the way to
achieve happiness is codied in
Buddhist teachings in the Four
Noble Truths: that suffering is
universal; that desire is the cause
of suffering; that suffering can be
avoided by eliminating desire;
that following the Eightfold Path
will eliminate desire. This last
Truth refers to what amounts to
a practical guide to the middle
way that Gautama laid out for his
followers to achieve enlightenment.

Peace comes
from within. Do not
seek it without.
Siddhartha Gautama

THE ANCIENT WORLD 33
The Eightfold Path (right action,
right intention, right livelihood,
right effort, right concentration,
right speech, right understanding,
and right mindfulness) is in effect
a code of ethicsa prescription for
a good life and the happiness that
Gautama rst set out to nd.

Nirvana
Gautama sees the ultimate goal of
life on Earth to be the ending of the
cycle of suffering (birth, death, and
rebirth) into which we are born. By
following the Eightfold Path, a man
can overcome his ego and live a
life free from suffering, and through
his enlightenment he can avoid the
pain of rebirth into another life of
suffering. He has realized his place
in the not-self, and become at one
with the eternal. He has attained
the state of Nirvanawhich is
variously translated as nonattachment, not-being, or literally
blowing out (as of a candle).
In the Brahmanism of Gautamas
time, and the Hindu religion that
followed, Nirvana was seen as
becoming one with god, but
Gautama carefully avoids any
mention of a deity or of an ultimate
purpose to life. He merely describes
Nirvana as unborn, unoriginated,
uncreated, and unformed, and
transcending any sensory

experience. It is an eternal and
unchanging state of not-being,
and so the ultimate freedom from
the suffering of existence.
Gautama spent many years
after his enlightenment traveling
around India, preaching and
teaching. During his lifetime, he
gained a considerable following,
and Buddhism became established
as a major religion as well as a
philosophy. His teachings were
passed down orally from generation
to generation by his followers, until
the 1st century CE, when they were
written down for the rst time.
Various schools began to appear
as Buddhism spread across India,
and later spread eastward into
China and Southeast Asia, where
it rivalled Confucianism and
Daoism in its popularity.

Gautamas teachings spread as far
as the Greek empire by the 3rd
century BCE, but had little inuence
on Western philosophy. However,
there were similarities between
Gautamas approach to philosophy
and that of the Greeks, not least
Gautamas emphasis on reasoning
as a means of nding happiness, and
his disciples use of philosophical
dialogues to elucidate his teachings.
His thoughts also nd echoes in the
ideas of later Western philosophers,
such as in Humes concept of the
self and Schopenhauers view of
the human condition. But it was
not until the 20th century that
Buddhism was to have any direct
inuence on Western thinking.
Since then, more and more
Westerners have turned to it
for guidance on how to live. 

The dharma wheel, one of the oldest
Buddhist symbols, represents the
Eightfold Path to Nirvana. In Buddhism,
the word dharma refers to the teachings
of the Buddha.

Right
Mindfulness
Right
Action

Right
Understanding

Right
Speech

The
Eightfold
Path

Right
Intention

The mind is
everything. What you
think, you become.
Siddhartha Gautama
Right
Concentration

Right
Livelihood
Right
Effort

HOLD
FAITHFULNESS
AND SINCERITY
AS
FIRST
PRINCIPLES
CONFUCIUS (551479 )
BCE

36 CONFUCIUS
IN CONTEXT
TRADITION
Chinese philosophy
APPROACH
Confucianism
BEFORE
7th century BCE The Hundred
Schools of Thought emerge.
6th century BCE Laozi
proposes acting in accordance
with the dao (the Way).
AFTER
c.470c.380 BCE Chinese
philosopher Mozi argues
against Confucian ideas.
372289 BCE Chinese thinker
Meng Zi revives Confucianism.
221202 BCE Confucianism is
suppressed by the Qin Dynasty.
136 BCE The Han Dynasty
introduces civil service
examinations modelled on
Confucian texts.
9th century CE Confucianism
is reborn as Neo-Confucianism.

Confucius

F

rom 770 to 220 BCE, China
enjoyed an era of great
cultural development, and
the philosophies that emerged
at this time were known as the
Hundred Schools of Thought. By
the 6th century BCE, the Zhou
Dynasty was in declinemoving
from the stability of the Spring
and Autumn Period to the aptly
named Warring States Period
and it was during this time that
Kong Fuzi, the Master Kong, or
Confucius, was born. Like other
philosophers of the agesuch as
Thales, Pythagoras, and Heraclitus
of GreeceConfucius sought
constants in a world of change,
and for him this meant a search
for moral values that could enable
rulers to govern justly.

The Analects
Unlike many of the early Chinese
philosophers, Confucius looked
to the past for his inspiration. He
was conservative by nature, and
had a great respect for ritual and
ancestor worshipboth of which
were maintained by the Zhou
Dynasty, whose rulers received
authority from the gods via the
so-called Heavenly Mandate.
According to tradition, Confucius
was born in 551 BCE in Qufu, in
the state of Lu, China. His name
was originally Kong Qiu, and only
later did he earn the title Kong
Fuzi, or Master Kong. Little is
known about his life, except that
he was from a well-to-do family,
and that as a young man he
worked as a servant to support
his family after his father died.
He nevertheless managed to nd
time to study, and became an
administrator in the Zhou court,
but when his suggestions to the
rulers were ignored he left to
concentrate on teaching.

The superior man does
what is proper to the station
in which he is; he does not
desire to go beyond this.
Confucius

A rigid social hierarchy existed in
China, but Confucius was part of
a new class of scholars who acted
as advisors to the courtsin effect
a class of civil servantsand they
achieved their status not through
inheritance, but by merit. It was
Confuciuss integration of the
old ideals with the emerging
meritocracy that produced his
unique new moral philosophy.
The main source we have for
the teachings of Confucius is the
Analects, a collection of fragments
of his writings and sayings compiled
by his disciples. It is primarily
a political treatise, made up of
As a teacher he traveled
throughout the empire, and at
the end of his life he returned
to Qufu, where he died in 479
BCE. His teaching survives in
fragments and sayings passed
down orally to his disciples,
and collected in the Analects
and anthologies compiled by
Confucian scholars.
Key works
5th century BCE
Analects
Doctrine of the Mean
Great Learning

THE ANCIENT WORLD 37
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223
Hajime Tanabe 24445



Laozi 2425

aphorisms and anecdotes that form
a sort of rule book for good
governmentbut his use of the
word junzi (literally gentleman) to
denote a superior, virtuous man,
indicates that his concerns were as
much social as political. Indeed,
many passages of the Analects
read like a book of etiquette. But
to see the Analects as merely a
social or political treatise is to miss
its central point. At its heart lies a
comprehensive ethical system.

The virtuous life
Before the appearance of the
Hundred Schools of Thought,
the world had been explained by
mythology and religion, and power
and moral authority were generally
accepted to be god-given. Confucius
is pointedly silent about the gods,
but he often refers to tian, or



Pythagoras 2629



Siddhartha Gautama 3033

Heaven, as the source of moral
order. According to the Analects,
we humans are the agents that
Heaven has chosen to embody its
will and to unite the world with
the moral orderan idea that was
in line with traditional Chinese
thinking. What breaks with
tradition, however, is Confuciuss
belief that devirtueis not
something Heaven-sent for the
ruling classes, but something that
can be cultivatedand cultivated
by anyone. Having himself risen to
be a minister of the Zhou court,
he believed that it was a duty of
the middle classes, as well as the
rulers, to strive to act with virtue
and benevolence (ren) to achieve
a just and stable society.
To reconcile the fact that society
was a rigid class system with his
belief that all men can receive the



Heraclitus 40



blessing of the Heavenly Mandate,
Confucius argues that the virtuous
man is not simply one who stands
at the top of the social hierarchy,
but one who understands his
place within that hierarchy and
embraces it to the full. And to
dene the various means of acting
in accordance with devirtuehe
turns to traditional Chinese values:
zhong, loyalty; xiao, lial piety; li,
ritual propriety; and shu, reciprocity.
The person who sincerely observes
these values Confucius called junzi,
the gentleman or superior man, by
which he means a man of virtue,
learning, and good manners.
The values of de had evolved
within the ruling classes but had
become little more than empty
gestures in the disintegrating
world of the Zhou Dynasty.
Confucius is attempting to 

Faithfulness
and sincerity...

...are shown in traditional
rituals and ceremonies.

These qualities in these
settings allow virtue to
become visible.

Others are
transformed
by virtue.

Virtue can then
be seen by others.

Virtue is then
made manifest
in the world.

Faithfulness and sincerity
hold the power of
transformation.

38 CONFUCIUS
The Five Constant
Relationships

SovereignSubject
Rulers should be benevolent,
and subjects loyal.

FatherSon
A parent is to be loving,
a child obedient.

HusbandWife
Husbands are to be good and
fair, and wives understanding.

Elder Br
B otthe
h r
Younger Brother
An elder sibling is to be
gentle, and younger
siblings respectful.

FriendFriend
Older friends are to
be considerate, younger
friends reverential.

persuade the rulers to return to
these ideals and to restore a just
government, but he also believes in
the power of benevolencearguing
that ruling by example rather than
by fear would inspire the people to
follow a similarly virtuous life. The
same principle, he believes, should
govern personal relationships.

Loyalty and ritual
In his analysis of relationships,
Confucius uses zhongthe virtue
of loyaltyas a guiding principle.
To begin with, he stresses the
importance of the loyalty of a
minister to his sovereign, then
shows that a similar relation holds
between father and son, husband
and wife, elder brother and younger
brother, and between friends. The
order in which he arranges these is
signicantpolitical loyalty rst,
then family and clan loyalties, then
loyalties to friends and strangers.
For Confucius, this hierarchy
reects the fact that each person
should know his station in society
as a whole, as well his place in the
family and the clan.
This aspect of knowing ones
station is exemplied by xiao
lial pietywhich for Confucius
was much more than just respect
for ones parents or elders. In fact,
this is the closest he gets to
religious ideas in the Analects, for
xiao is connected to the traditional
practice of ancestor worship. Above
all, xiao reinforced the relationship
of inferior to superior, which was
central to his thinking.
It is in his insistence on li
ritual proprietythat Confucius
is at his most conservative. Li did
not simply refer to rituals such as
ancestor worship, but also to the
social norms that underpinned
every aspect of contemporary
Chinese life. These ranged from
ceremonies such as marriages,

Ritual and tradition, for Confucius,
are vital for binding an individual
to his community. By knowing his
place in society, the individual is free
to become junzi, a man of virtue.

funerals, and sacrices to the
etiquette of receiving guests,
presenting gifts, and the simple,
everyday gestures of politeness,
such as bowing and using the
correct mode of address. These are,
according to Confucius, the outward
signs of an inner debut only when
they are performed with sincerity,
which he considers to be the way of
Heaven. Through the outward show
of loyalty with inner sincerity, the
superior man can transform society.

Sincerity
For Confucius, society can be
changed by example. As he writes:
Sincerity becomes apparent.
From being apparent, it becomes
manifest. From being manifest,
it becomes brilliant. Brilliant, it
affects others. Affecting others,
they are changed by it. Changed by
it, they are transformed. Only he
who is possessed of the most
complete sincerity that can exist
under Heaven, can transform.
Here, Confucius is at his least
conservative, and he explains that
the process of transformation can
work both ways. The concept of
zhong (faithfulness) also has an

THE ANCIENT WORLD 39

What you know,
you know;
what you dont know,
you dont know.
This is true wisdom.
Confucius

implication of regard for others.
He took the view that one can learn
to become a superior man by rst
recognizing what one does not know
(an idea echoed a century later by
the Greek philosopher Socrates,
who claimed that his wisdom lay
in accepting that he knew nothing),
and then by watching other people:
if they show virtue, try to become
their equal; if they are inferior,
be their guide.

Self-reection
This notion of zhong as a regard
for others is also tied to the last of
the Confucian values of de: shu,
reciprocity, or self-reection, which
should govern our actions toward
others. The so-called Golden Rule,
do as you would be done by,
appears in Confucianism as a
negative: what you do not desire
for yourself, do not do to others.
The difference is subtle but crucial:
Confucius does not prescribe
what to do, only what not to do,
emphasizing restraint rather than
Confuciuss devotion to the idea
of establishing a humane society led
him to travel the Chinese empire for
12 years, teaching the virtues of
faithfulness and sincerity.

action. This implies modesty and
humilityvalues traditionally held
in high regard in Chinese society,
and which for Confucius express
our true nature. Fostering these
values is a form of loyalty to oneself,
and another kind of sincerity.

Confucianism
Confucius had little success in
persuading contemporary rulers to
adopt his ideas in government, and
turned his attention to teaching.
His disciples, including Meng Zi
(Mencius), continued to anthologize
and expand on his writings, which
survived the repressive Qin
Dynasty, and inspired a revival of
Confucianism in the Han Dynasty
of the early Common Era. From
then on, the impact of Confuciuss
ideas was profound, inspiring
almost every aspect of Chinese
society, from administration to
politics and philosophy. The major
religions of Daoism and Buddhism
had also been ourishing in
Confuciuss time, replacing
traditional beliefs, and although
Confucius offered no opinion on

them, remaining silent about the
gods, he nevertheless inuenced
aspects of both new faiths.
A Neo-Confucian school
revitalized the movement in the 9th
century, and reached its peak in the
12th century, when its inuence
was felt across Southeast Asia into
Korea and Japan. Although Jesuit
missionaries brought back Kong
Fuzis ideas to Europe (and
Latinized his name to Confucius)
in the 16th century, Confucianism
was alien to European thought
and had limited inuence until
translations of his work appeared
in the late 17th century.
Despite the fall of imperial
China in 1911, Confucian ideas
continued to form the basis of
many Chinese moral and social
conventions, even if they were
ofcially frowned upon. In recent
years the Peoples Republic of China
has shown a renewed interest in
Confucius, integrating his ideas
with both modern Chinese thought
and Western philosophy, creating
a hybrid philosophy known as
New Confucianism. 

40

EVERYTHING
IS FLUX
HERACLITUS (C.535475 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Monism
BEFORE
6th century BCE The Milesian
philosophers claim that the
cosmos is made up of a single
specic substance.
6th century BCE Pythagoras
states that the universe has
an underlying structure that
can be dened mathematically.
AFTER
Early 5th century BCE
Parmenides uses logical
deduction to prove change
is impossible.
Late 4th century BCE Plato
describes the world as being
in a state of ux, but dismisses
Heraclitus as contradictory.
Early 19th century Georg
Hegel bases his dialectic
system of philosophy on the
integration of opposites.

W

here other early Greek
philosophers seek to
uncover scientic
explanations for the physical nature
of the cosmos, Heraclitus sees it as
being governed by a divine logos.
Sometimes interpreted to mean
reason or argument, Heraclitus
considers the logos to be a universal,
cosmic law, according to which all
things come into being, and by
which all the material elements of
the universe are held in balance.
It is the balancing of opposites,
such as day and night and hot and
cold, which Heraclitus believes

The road up and
the road down are
one and the same.
Heraclitus

leads to the unity of the universe,
or the idea everything is part of a
single fundamental process or
substancethe central tenet of
monism. But he also states that
tension is constantly generated
between these pairs of opposites,
and he therefore concludes that
everything must be in a permanent
state of ux, or change. Day, for
instance, changes into night, which
in turn changes back again to day.
Heraclitus offers the example
of a river to illustrate his theory:
You can never step into the same
river twice. By this, he means that
at the very moment you step into a
river, fresh waters will immediately
replace those into which you initially
placed your foot, and yet the river
itself is always described as one
xed and unchanging thing.
Heraclituss belief that every
object in the universe is in a state
of constant ux runs counter to the
thinking of the philosophers of the
Milesian school, such as Thales
and Anaximenes, who dene all
things by their quintessentially
unchanging essence. 

See also: Thales of Miletus 2223  Anaximenes of Miletus 330 
Pythagoras 2629  Parmenides 41  Plato 5055  Georg Hegel 17885

THE ANCIENT WORLD 41

ALL IS ONE

PARMENIDES (C.515445 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Monism
BEFORE
6th century BCE Pythagoras
sees mathematical structure,
rather than a substance, as
the foundation of the cosmos.
c.500 BCE Heraclitus says that
everything is in a state of ux.
AFTER
Late 5th century BCE Zeno
of Elea presents his paradoxes
to demonstrate the illusory
nature of our experience.
c.400 BCE Democritus and
Leucippus say the cosmos is
composed of atoms in a void.
Late 4th century BCE Plato
presents his theory of Forms,
claiming that abstract ideas
are the highest form of reality.
1927 Martin Heidegger writes
Being and Time, reviving the
question of the sense of being.

T

he ideas put forward by
Parmenides mark a key
turning point in Greek
philosophy. Inuenced by the
logical, scientic thinking of
Pythagoras, Parmenides employs
deductive reasoning in an attempt
to uncover the true physical nature
of the world. His investigations lead
him to take the opposite view to
that of Heraclitus.
From the premise that something
exists (It is), Parmenides deduces
that it cannot also not exist (It is
not), as this would involve a logical
contradiction. It follows therefore
that a state of nothing existing is
impossiblethere can be no void.
Something cannot then come from
nothing, and so must always have
existed in some form. This
permanent form cannot change,
because something that is
permanent cannot change into
something else without it ceasing
to be permanent. Fundamental
change is therefore impossible.
Parmenides concludes from this
pattern of thought that everything
that is real must be eternal and

Understanding the cosmos is one of
the oldest philosophical quests. In the
20th century, evidence from quantum
physics emerged to support ideas that
Parmenides reached by reason alone.

unchanging, and must have an
indivisible unityall is one.
More importantly for subsequent
philosophers, Parmenides shows by
his process of reasoning that our
perception of the world is faulty and
full of contradictions. We seem to
experience change, and yet our
reason tells us that change is
impossible. The only conclusion
we can come to is that we can
never rely on the experience that
is delivered to us by our senses. 

See also: Pythagoras 2629  Heraclitus 40  Democritus and Leucippus 45
Zeno of Elea 331  Plato 5055  Martin Heidegger 252255



42

MAN IS THE
MEASURE OF
ALL THINGS
PROTAGORAS (C.490420 BCE)

IN CONTEXT

It is a spring day
in Athens.

BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Relativism

A visitor from Sweden says
the weather is warm.

BEFORE
Early 5th century BCE
Parmenides argues that we
can rely more on reason than
the evidence of our senses.
AFTER
Early 4th century BCE
Platos theory of Forms states
that there are absolutes or
ideal forms of everything.
1580 French writer Michel de
Montaigne espouses a form of
relativism to describe human
behavior in his Essays.
196772 Jacques Derrida uses
his technique of deconstruction
to show that any text contains
irreconcilable contradictions.
2005 Benedict XVI warns
we are moving towards a
dictatorship of relativism in
his rst public address as pope.

A visitor from Egypt
says the weather is cold.

Both people are
speaking the truth.

The truth depends on
perspective and is
therefore relative.

D

uring the 5th century BCE,
Athens evolved into an
important and prosperous
city-state, and under the leadership
of Pericles (445429 BCE) it entered
a Golden Age of scholarship and
culture. This attracted people from
all parts of Greece, and for those
who knew and could interpret the
law, there were rich pickings to be
had. The city was run on broadly
democratic principles, with an
established legal system. Anyone

Man is the
measure of
all things.

taken to court was required to
plead his own case; there were no
advocates, but a recognized class
of advisors soon evolved. Among
this group was Protagoras.

Everything is relative
Protagoras lectured in law and
rhetoric to anybody who could
afford him. His teachings were
essentially about practical matters,
arguing to win a civil case rather
than to prove a point, but he could

THE ANCIENT WORLD 43
See also: Parmenides 41



Socrates 4649

Many things prevent
knowledge, including
the obscurity of
the subject and the
brevity of human life.
Protagoras

see the philosophical implications
of what he taught. For Protagoras,
every argument has two sides,
and both may be equally valid.
He claims that he can make the
worse case the better, proving not
the worth of the argument, but the
persuasiveness of its proponent. In
this way, he recognizes that belief
is subjective, and it is the man
holding the view or opinion that is
the measure of its worth. This style
of reasoning, common in law and

Protagoras



Plato 5055



Michel de Montaigne 10809



Jacques Derrida 30813

politics at that time, was new to
philosophy. By placing human
beings at its center, it continued
a tradition of taking religion out
of philosophical argument, and it
also shifted the focus of philosophy
away from an understanding of
the nature of the universe to an
examination of human behavior.
Protagoras is mainly interested in
practical questions. Philosophical
speculations on the substance of
the cosmos or about the existence
of the gods seem pointless to him,
as he considers such things to be
ultimately unknowable.
The main implication of man
is the measure of all things is that
belief is subjective and relative.
This leads Protagoras to reject the
existence of absolute denitions
of truth, justice, or virtue. What is
true for one person may be false for
another, he claims. This relativism
also applies to moral values, such
as what is right and what is wrong.
To Protagoras, nothing is inherently
good in itself. Something is ethical,
or right, only because a person or
society judges it to be so.

Protagoras was the most inuential
of a group of itinerant teachers of
law and rhetoric that became
known as the Sophists (from the
Greek sophia, meaning wisdom).
Socrates and Plato derided the
Sophists as mere rhetoricians,
but with Protagoras there was a
signicant step in ethics toward
the view that there are no absolutes
and that all judgements, including
moral judgements, are subjective. 

Protagoras was born in Abdera,
in northeast Greece, but traveled
widely as an itinerant teacher. At
some stage, he moved to Athens,
where he became advisor to the
ruler of the city-state, Pericles,
who commissioned him to write
the constitution for the colony of
Thurii in 444 BCE. Protagoras was
a proponent of agnosticism, and
legend has it that he was later
tried for impiety, and that his
books were publicly burned.
Only fragments of his writings
survive, although Plato discusses
the views of Protagoras at length
in his dialogues.

Protagoras is believed to have
lived to the age of 70, but his
exact date and place of death
are unknown.

According to Protagoras, any truth
uncovered by these two philosophers,
depicted on a 5th-century BCE Greek
drinking vessel, will depend on their
use of rhetoric and their debating skill.

Key works
5th century BCE
On the Gods
Truth
On Being
The Art of Controversy
On Mathematics
On the State
On Ambition
On Virtues
On the Original State of Things

44

WHEN ONE THROWS
TO ME A PEACH,
I RETURN TO HIM
AMOZIPLUM
( .470391 )
C

IN CONTEXT
TRADITION
Chinese philosophy
APPROACH
Mohism
BEFORE
6th century BCE Laozi states
that to live according to the
dao means acting intuitively
and in accordance with nature.
Late 6th century BCE
Confuciuss moral philosophy
stresses the importance of
family ties and traditions.
AFTER
Mid-4th century BCE
The Confucian philosophy
of Mencius stresses mans
innate goodness.
Mid-4th century BCE Daoist
philosopher Zhuangzi criticizes
Confucianism and Mohism.
3rd century BCE Legalism is
adopted by the Qin dynasty. It
opposes Mohism, advocating
strong laws to keep mans
essentially evil nature in check.

BCE

orn in 479 BCE, shortly after
the death of Confucius,
Mozi had a traditional
Chinese education based on the
classic texts. Later, however, he
came to dislike the emphasis on
clan relationships that runs through
Confucianism, and this led him
to set up his own school of thought,
advocating universal love or jian ai.
By jian ai, Mozi means that we
should care for all people equally,
regardless of their status or their
relationship to us. He regards this
philosophy, which became known
as Mohism and which nourishes
and sustains all life, as being
fundamentally benevolent and in
accordance with the way of heaven.
Mozi believes that there is
always reciprocity in our actions.
By treating others as we would
wish to be treated ourselves, we
will receive similar treatment in
return. This is the meaning behind
when one throws to me a peach, I
return to him a plum. When this
principle of caring for everyone
impartially is applied by rulers,
Mozi states that it avoids conict

B

Mao Zedong regarded Mozi as the
true philosopher of the people, because
of his humble origins. Mozis view that
everyone should be treated equally has
been encouraged in modern China.

and war; when the same principle
is practiced by everyone, it leads to
a more harmonious and therefore
more productive society. This idea
is similar in spirit to that of the
Utilitarianism proposed by Western
philosophers of the 19th century. 

See also: Laozi 2425  Siddhartha Gautama 3033  Confucius 3439
Wang Bi 331  Jeremy Bentham 174  Hajime Tanabe 24445



THE ANCIENT WORLD 45

NOTHING EXISTS
EXCEPT ATOMS
AND
EMPTY
SPACE
DEMOCRITUS ( . 460371 )
C

BCE

AND LEUCIPPUS (EARLY 5TH CENTURY BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Atomism
BEFORE
Early 6th century BCE Thales
says that the cosmos is made
of one fundamental substance.
c.500 BCE Heraclitus declares
that everything is in a state of
constant ux, or change.
AFTER
c.300 BCE The Epicurians
conclude that there is no
afterlife, as the bodys atoms
disperse after death.
1805 British chemist John
Dalton proposes that all pure
substances contain atoms of
a single type that combine
to form compounds.
1897 The British physicist
J.J. Thomson discovers that
atoms can be divided into
even smaller particles.

F

rom the 6th century BCE
onward, philosophers began
to consider whether the
universe was made from a single
fundamental substance. During the
5th century BCE, two philosophers
from Abderra in Greece, named
Democritus and Leucippus,
suggested that everything was
made up of tiny, indivisible, and
unchangeable particles, which they
called atoms (atomos is Greek for
uncuttable).

First atomic theory
Democritus and Leucippus also
claim that a void or empty space
separates atoms, allowing them to
move around freely. As the atoms
move, they may collide with each
other to form new arrangements of
atoms, so that objects in the world
will appear to change. The two
thinkers consider that there are
an innite number of these eternal
atoms, but that the number of
different combinations they can
arrange themselves into is nite.
This explains the apparent xed
number of different substances that
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223



exist. The atoms that make up our
bodies, for example, do not decay
and disappear when we die, but are
dispersed and can be reconstituted.
Known as atomism, the theory
that Democritus and Leucippus
devised offered the rst complete
mechanistic view of the universe,
without any recourse to the notion
of a god or gods. It also identied
fundamental properties of matter
that have proved critical to the
development of the physical
sciences, particularly from the 17th
century onward, right up to the
atomic theories that revolutionized
science in the 20th century.

Man is a microcosm
of the universe.
Democritus

Heraclitus 40



Epicurus 6465

46

THE LIFE WHICH
IS UNEXAMINED
IS NOT WORTH
LIVING
SOCRATES (469399 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Dialectical method
BEFORE
c.600450 BCE Pre-Socratic
philosophers in Ionia and Italy
attempt to explain the nature
of the cosmos.
Early 5th century BCE
Parmenides states that we
can only understand the
universe through reasoning.
c.450 BCE Protagoras and the
Sophists apply rhetoric to
philosophical questions.
AFTER
c.399355 BCE Plato portrays
the character of Socrates in
the Apology and numerous
other dialogues.
4th century BCE Aristotle
acknowledges his debt to
Socrates method.

S

ocrates is often referred to
as one of the founders of
Western philosophy, and
yet he wrote nothing, established
no school, and held no particular
theories of his own. What he did do,
however, was persistently ask the
questions that interested him, and
in doing so evolved a new way of
thinking, or a new way of examining
what we think. This has been called
the Socratic, or dialectical, method
(dialectical because it proceeds
as a dialogue between opposing
views), and it earned him many
enemies in Athens, where he lived.
He was vilied as a Sophist
(someone who argues for the sake
of deception), and was sentenced to

THE ANCIENT WORLD 47
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223
Parmenides 41  Protagoras 4243




Pythagoras 2629  Heraclitus 40
Plato 5055  Aristotle 5663



The only life worth
living is a good life.

I can only live a good
life if I really know what
good and evil are.

An unquestioning life
is one of ignorance,
without morality.

Good and evil are not
relative; they are absolutes
that can only be found by
a process of questioning
and reasoning.

In this way, morality
and knowledge are
bound together.

The life which is
unexamined is not
worth living.

death on charges of corrupting the
young with ideas that undermined
tradition. But he also had many
followers, and among them was
Plato, who recorded Socrates ideas
in a series of written works, called
dialogues, in which Socrates sets
about examining various ideas. It is
largely thanks to these dialogues
which include the Apology, Phaedo,
and the Symposiumthat Socrates
thought survived at all, and that it
went on to guide the course of
Western philosophy.

The purpose of life
Socrates lived in Athens in the
second half of the 5th century BCE.
As a young man he is believed to

have studied natural philosophy,
looking at the various explanations
of the nature of the universe, but
then became involved in the politics
of the city-state and concerned
with more down-to-earth ethical
issues, such as the nature of justice.
However, he was not interested in
winning arguments, or arguing
for the sake of making moneya
charge that was leveled at many of
his contemporaries. Nor was he
seeking answers or explanations
he was simply examining the
basis of the concepts we apply to
ourselves (such as good, bad,
and just), for he believed that
understanding what we are is
the rst task of philosophy. 

Socrates
Born in Athens in 469 BCE,
Socrates was the son of a
stonemason and a midwife.
It is likely that he pursued his
fathers profession, and had
the opportunity to study
philosophy, before he was
called up for military service.
After distinguishing himself
during the Peloponnesian War,
he returned to Athens, and for
a while involved himself in
politics. However, when his
father died he inherited
enough money to live with
his wife Xanthippe without
having to work.
From then on, Socrates
became a familiar sight around
Athens, involving himself in
philosophical discussions with
fellow citizens and gaining a
following of young students.
He was eventually accused of
corrupting the minds of young
Athenians, and was sentenced
to death. Although he was
offered the choice of exile, he
accepted the guilty verdict
and was given a fatal dose
of hemlock in 399 BCE.
Key works
4th3rd century BCE
Platos record of Socrates life
and philosophy in the Apology
and numerous dialogues.

48 SOCRATES

I am a citizen
of the world.
Socrates

Q. So you think
that the gods
know everything?

Socrates central concern, then,
was the examination of life, and it
was his ruthless questioning of
peoples most cherished beliefs
(largely about themselves) that
earned him his enemiesbut he
remained committed to his task
until the very end. According to the
account of his defence at his trial,
recorded by Plato, Socrates chose
death rather than face a life of
ignorance: The life which is
unexamined is not worth living.
Socrates dialectical method
was a simple method of questioning
that brought to light the often false
assumptions on which particular
claims to knowledge are based.

A. Yes, because
they are gods.
Q. Do some gods
disagree with others?

Q. So gods disagree
about what is
true and right?

A. Yes, of course
they do. They are
always ghting.

A. I suppose
they must do.
Q. So some gods
can be wrong
sometimes?

A. I suppose
that is true.

Therefore the gods
cannot know
everything!

But what exactly is involved in this
examination of life? For Socrates it
was a process of questioning the
meaning of essential concepts that
we use every day but have never
really thought about, thereby
revealing their real meaning and
our own knowledge or ignorance.
Socrates was one of the rst
philosophers to consider what it
was that constituted a good life;
for him it meant achieving peace of
mind as a result of doing the right
thing, rather than living according to
the moral codes of society. And the
right thing can only be determined
through rigorous examination.
Socrates rejected the notion
that concepts such as virtue were
relative, insisting instead that they
were absolutes, applicable not just to
citizens of Athens, or Greece, but to
all people in the world. He believed
that virtue (aret in Greek, which at
the time implied excellence and
fullment) was the most valuable
of possessions, and that no-one
actually desires to do evil. Anyone
performing evil actions would be
acting against their conscience and
would therefore feel uncomfortable;
and as we all strive for peace of
mind it is not something we would
do willingly. Evil, he thought, was
done because of lack of wisdom and
knowledge. From this he concluded
that there is only one good:
knowledge; and one evil: ignorance.
Knowledge is inextricably bound to
moralityit is the only one
goodand for this reason we must
continually examine our lives.

Care of the soul
For Socrates, knowledge may also
play a part in life after death. In the
Apology, Platos Socrates prefaces
his famous quote about the
unexamined life by saying: I tell
you that to let no day pass without
discussing goodness and all the

THE ANCIENT WORLD 49
other subjects about which you
hear me talking, and that examining
both myself and others is really the
very best thing a man can do.
This gaining of knowledge, rather
than wealth or high status, is the
ultimate goal of life. It is not a matter
of entertainment or curiosityit is
the reason why we exist. Moreover,
all knowledge is ultimately selfknowledge, for it creates the person
you are within this world, and
fosters the care of the immortal soul.
In Phaedo, Socrates says that an
unexamined life leads the soul to
be confused and dizzy, as if it
were drunk, while the wise soul
achieves stability, its straying
nally brought to an end.

Dialectical method
Socrates quickly became a wellknown gure in Athens, with a
reputation for an enquiring mind.
A friend of his, so the story goes,
asked the priestess of Apollo at
Delphi who the wisest man in the
world was: the oracular reply was
that there was no-one wiser than
Socrates. When Socrates heard
about this, he was astounded, and
went to the most knowledgeable
people he could nd to try to
disprove it. What he discovered
was that these people only thought
they knew a great deal; under
examination, their knowledge was
proved to be either limited or false.
What was more important,
however, was the method he used
to question their knowledge. He
took the standpoint of someone who
knew nothing, and merely asked
questions, exposing contradictions
in arguments and gaps in knowledge
Socrates was put to death in 399 BCE,
ultimately for questioning the basis of
Athenian morality. Here he accepts the
bowl of hemlock that will kill him, and
gestures deantly at the heavens.

to gradually elicit insights. He
likened the process to his mothers
profession of midwife, assisting
in the birth of ideas.
Through these discussions,
Socrates came to realize that the
Delphic oracle had been right 
he was the wisest man in Athens,
not because of his knowledge but
because he professed to know
nothing. He also saw that the
inscription on the entrance to the
temple at Delphi, gnothi seauton
(know thyself), was just as
signicant. To gain knowledge
of the world and oneself it was
necessary to realize the limits of
ones own ignorance and to remove
all preconceptions. Only then could
one hope to determine the truth.
Socrates set about engaging the
people of Athens in discussion on
topics such as the nature of love,
justice, and loyalty. His mission,
misunderstood at the time as a
dangerous form of Sophistryor
cleverness for the sake of itwas
not to instruct the people, nor even
simply to learn what they knew, but
to explore the ideas that they had.
It was the conversation itself, with
Socrates guiding it, that provided
him with insights. Through a series
of questions, he revealed the ideas
and assumptions his opponent held,

I know nothing except
the fact of my ignorance.
Socrates

then exposed the contradictions
within them and brought them to
agree to a new set of conclusions.
This method of examining an
argument by rational discussion
from a position of ignorance marked
a complete change in philosophical
thinking. It was the rst known
use of inductive argument, in
which a set of premises based
on experience is rst established
to be true, and then shown to lead
to a universal truth in conclusion.
This powerful form of argument
was developed by Aristotle, and
later by Francis Bacon, who used
it as the starting point of his
scientic method. It became,
therefore, the foundation not
only of Western philosophy, but
of all the empirical sciences. 

EARTHLY
KNOWLEDGE IS BUT
SHADOW
PLATO (C.427347 BCE)

52 PLATO
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology

world
of Ideas, which contains
the Ideal Forms of everything.

APPROACH
Rationalism
BEFORE
6th century BCE The Milesian
philosophers propose theories
to explain the nature and
substance of the cosmos.

We are born
with the concepts of
these Ideal Forms
in our minds.

The illusory world in which
we livethe world of the
sensescontains imperfect
copies of the Ideal Forms.

c.500 BCE Heraclitus argues
that everything is constantly
in a state of ux or change.
c.450 BCE Protagoras says
that truth is relative.
AFTER
c.335 BCE Aristotle teaches
that we can nd truth by
observing the world around us.
c.250 CE Plotinus founds
the Neo-Platonist school, a
religious take on Platos ideas.
386 St. Augustine of Hippo
integrates Platos theories into
Christian doctrine.

I

n 399 BCE, Platos mentor
Socrates was condemned to
death. Socrates had left no
writings, and Plato took it upon
himself to preserve what he had
learnt from his master for
posterityrst in the Apology, his
retelling of Socrates defense at his
trial, and later by using Socrates as
a character in a series of dialogues.
In these dialogues, it is sometimes
difcult to untangle which are
Socrates thoughts and which are
the original thoughts of Plato, but a
picture emerges of Plato using the
methods of his master to explore
and explain his own ideas.

We recognize things in the world,
such as dogs, because we recognize
they are imperfect copies of the
concepts in our minds.

Everything in this world is
a shadow of its Ideal Form
in the world of Ideas.

Initially Platos concerns were very
much those of his mentor: to search
for denitions of abstract moral
values such as justice and
virtue, and to refute Protagorass
notion that right and wrong are
relative terms. In the Republic,
Plato set out his vision of the ideal
city-state and explored aspects of
virtue. But in the process, he also
tackled subjects outside moral
philosophy. Like earlier Greek
thinkers, he questioned the nature
and substance of the cosmos, and
explored how the immutable and
eternal could exist in a seemingly
changing world. However, unlike

his predecessors, Plato concluded
that the unchanging in nature is
the same as the unchanging in
morals and society.

Seeking the Ideal
In the Republic, Plato describes
Socrates posing questions about
the virtues, or moral concepts, in
order to establish clear and precise
denitions of them. Socrates had
famously said that virtue is
knowledge, and that to act justly,
for example, you must rst ask what
justice is. Plato decides that before
referring to any moral concept in
our thinking or reasoning, we must

THE ANCIENT WORLD 53
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223
St. Augustine of Hippo 7273



Heraclitus 40

rst explore both what we mean by
that concept and what makes it
precisely the kind of thing that it is.
He raises the question of how we
would recognize the correct, or
perfect, form of anythinga form
that is true for all societies and for
all time. By doing so, Plato is
implying that he thinks some kind
of ideal form of things in the world
we inhabitwhether those things
are moral concepts or physical
objectsmust actually exist, of
which we are in some way aware.
Plato talks about objects in the
world around us, such as beds.
When we see a bed, he states, we
know that it is a bed and we can
recognize all beds, even though
they may differ in numerous ways.
Dogs in their many species are
even more varied, yet all dogs share
the characteristic of dogginess,
which is something we can
recognize, and that allows us to
say we know what a dog is. Plato
argues that it is not just that a
shared dogginess or bedness
exists, but that we all have in our
minds an idea of an ideal bed or
dog, which we use to recognize any
particular instance.
Taking a mathematical example
to further his argument, Plato shows
that true knowledge is reached by
reasoning, rather than through our
senses. He states that we can work
out in logical steps that the square
of the hypotenuse of a right-angled
triangle is equal to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides, or
that the sum of the three interior
The Allegory of the Cave, in which
knowledge of the world is limited to
mere shadows of reality and truth, is
used by Plato to explain his idea of
a world of perfect Forms, or Ideas.



Protagoras 4243



Socrates 4649

angles of any triangle is always
180 degrees. We know the truth of
these statements, even though the
perfect triangle does not exist
anywhere in the natural world. Yet
we are able to perceive the perfect
triangleor the perfect straight
line or circlein our minds, using
our reason. Plato, therefore, asks
whether such perfect forms can
exist anywhere.



Aristotle 5663



Plotinus 331



If particulars are to
have meaning, there
must be universals.
Plato

World of Ideas
Reasoning brings Plato to only one
conclusionthat there must be a
world of Ideas, or Forms, which is
totally separate from the material
world. It is there that the Idea of the
perfect triangle, along with the
Idea of the perfect bed and dog
exists. He concludes that human
senses cannot perceive this place
directlyit is only perceptible to us
through reason. Plato even goes on
to state that this realm of Ideas is
reality, and that the world around
us is merely modelled upon it.
To illustrate his theory, Plato
presents what has become known
as the Allegory of the Cave. He

asks us to imagine a cave in which
people have been imprisoned since
birth, tied up facing the back wall
in the darkness. They can only face
straight ahead. Behind the prisoners
is a bright re, which casts shadows
onto the wall they are facing. There
is also a rampart between the re
and the prisoners along which
people walk and hold up various
objects from time to time, so that
the shadows of these objects are
cast on the wall. These shadows
are all the prisoners know of the 

54 PLATO
According to Platos theory of Forms, every
horse that we encounter in the world around us is
a lesser version of an ideal, or perfect, horse that
exists in a world of Forms or Ideasa realm that
humans can only access through
their ability to reason.

The world
d of ideas

other of what Plato considers to be
reality, also solves the problem of
nding constants in an apparently
changing world. The material world
may be subject to change, but
Platos world of Ideas is eternal and
immutable. Plato applies his theory
not just to concrete things, such as
beds and dogs, but also to abstract
concepts. In Platos world of Ideas,
there is an Idea of justice, which is
true justice, and all the instances of
justice in the material world around
us are models, or lesser variants, of
it. The same is true of the concept
of goodness, which Plato considers
to be the ultimate Ideaand the
goal of all philosophical enquiry.

Innate knowledge

The world of the senses
world; they have no concept of the
actual objects themselves. If one
of the prisoners manages to untie
himself and turn around, he will
see the objects themselves. But
after a lifetime of entrapment, he
is likely to be confused, as well as
dazzled by the re, and will most
likely turn back toward the wall
and the only reality he knows.
Plato believes that everything
that our senses perceive in the
material world is like the images
on the cave wall, merely shadows
of reality. This belief is the basis
of his theory of Forms, which is that
for every earthly thing that we have

the power to perceive with our
senses, there is a corresponding
Form (or Idea)an eternal and
perfect reality of that thingin the
world of Ideas. Because what we
perceive via our senses is based
on an experience of imperfect or
incomplete shadows of reality,
we can have no real knowledge of
those things. At best, we may have
opinions, but genuine knowledge
can only come from study of the
Ideas, and that can only ever be
achieved through reason, rather
than through our deceptive senses.
This separation of two distinct
worlds, one of appearance, the

The problem remains of how we
can come to know these Ideas, so
that we have the ability to recognize
the imperfect instances of them in
the world we inhabit. Plato argues
that our conception of Ideal Forms
must be innate, even if we are not
aware of this. He believes that
human beings are divided into two
parts: the body and the soul. Our
bodies possess the senses, through
which we are able to perceive the
material world, while the soul
possesses the reason with which
we can perceive the realm of Ideas.
Plato concludes that our soul, which
is immortal and eternal, must have

The soul of
man is immortal
and imperishable.
Plato

THE ANCIENT WORLD 55

Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor
from 161 to 180 CE, was not just a
powerful ruler, he was a noted scholar
and thinkera realization of Platos idea
that philosophers should lead society.

inhabited the world of Ideas before
our birth, and still yearns to return
to that realm after our death. So
when we see variations of the Ideas
in the world with our senses, we
recognize them as a sort of
recollection. Recalling the innate

Plato

memories of these Ideas requires
reasonan attribute of the soul.
For Plato, the philosophers job
is to use reason to discover the
Ideal Forms or Ideas. In the
Republic, he also argues that it is
philosophers, or rather those who
are true to the philosophers calling,
who should be the ruling class.
This is because only the true
philosopher can understand the
exact nature of the world and the
truth of moral values. However, just
like a prisoner in the Allegory of
the Cave who sees the real objects
rather than their shadows, many
will just turn back to the only world
they feel comfortable with. Plato
often found it difcult to convince
his fellow philosophers of the true
nature of their calling.

Unsurpassed legacy
Plato himself was the embodiment
of his ideal, or true, philosopher. He
argued on questions of ethics that
had been raised previously by the
followers of Protagoras and Socrates,
but in the process, he explored for
the rst time the path to knowledge
itself. He was a profound inuence
on his pupil Aristotleeven if they
fundamentally disagreed about the
Despite the large proportion of
writings attributed to Plato that
have survived, little is known
about his life. He was born into a
noble family in Athens in around
427 BCE and named Aristocles, but
acquired the nickname Plato
(meaning broad). Although
probably destined for a life in
politics, he became a pupil of
Socrates. When Socrates was
condemned to death, Plato is said
to have become disillusioned with
Athens, and left the city. He
travelled widely, spending some
time in southern Italy and Sicily,
before returning to Athens around

What we call learning
is only a process
of recollection.
Plato

theory of Forms. Platos ideas later
found their way into the philosophy
of medieval Islamic and Christian
thinkers, including St. Augustine of
Hippo, who combined Platos ideas
with those of the Church.
By proposing that the use of
reason, rather than observation, is
the only way to acquire knowledge,
Plato also laid the foundations of
17th-century rationalism. Platos
inuence can still be felt today
the broad range of subjects he
wrote about led the 20th-century
British logician Alfred North
Whitehead to say that subsequent
Western philosophy consists of a
set of footnotes to Plato. 
385 BCE. Here he founded a
school known as the Academy
(from which the word academic
comes), remaining its head until
his death in 347 BCE.
Key works
c.399387 BCE Apology, Crito,
Giorgias, Hippias Major, Meno,
Protagoras (early dialogues)
c.380360 BCE Phaedo, Phaedrus,
Republic, Symposium (middle
dialogues)
c.360355 BCE Parmenides,
Sophist, Theaetetus (late
dialogues)

TRUTH

RESIDES IN THE WORLD

AROUND US

ARISTOTLE (384322 BCE)

58 ARISTOTLE

A

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Empiricism
BEFORE
399 BCE Socrates argues that
virtue is wisdom.
c.380 BCE Plato presents his
theory of Forms in his Socratic
dialogue, The Republic.
AFTER
9th century CE Aristotles
writings are translated
into Arabic.
13th century Translations
of Aristotles works appear
in Latin.
1690 John Locke establishes
a school of British empiricism.
1735 Zoologist Carl Linnaeus
lays the foundations of modern
taxonomy in Systema Naturae,
based on Aristotles system
of biological classication.

different
instances of dog in
the world around us.

ristotle was 17 years old
when he arrived in Athens
to study at the Academy
under the great philosopher Plato.
Plato himself was 60 at the time,
and had already devised his theory
of Forms. According to this theory,
all earthly phenomena, such as
justice and the color green, are
shadows of ideal counterparts, called
Forms, which give their earthly
models their particular identities.
Aristotle was a studious type,
and no doubt learnt a great deal from
his master, but he was also of a very
different temperament. Where Plato
was brilliant and intuitive, Aristotle
was scholarly and methodical.
Nevertheless, there was an obvious
mutual respect, and Aristotle stayed
at the Academy, both as a student
and a teacher, until Plato died 20
years later. Surprisingly, he was not
chosen as Platos successor, and so
he left Athens and took what would
prove to be a fruitful trip to Ionia.

Platos theory questioned
The break from teaching gave
Aristotle the opportunity to indulge
his passion for studying wildlife,
which intensied his feeling that
Platos theory of Forms was wrong.

It is tempting to imagine that
Aristotles arguments had already
had some inuence on Plato, who
in his later dialogues admitted
some aws in his earlier theories,
but it is impossible to know for
certain. We do know, though, that
Plato was aware of the Third Man
argument, which Aristotle used to
refute his theory of Forms. This
argument runs as follows: if there
exists in a realm of Forms a perfect
Form of Man on which earthly men
are modelled, this Form, to have
any conceivable content, would
have to be based on a Form of the
Form of Manand this too would
have to be based on a higher Form
on which the Forms of the Forms
are based, and so on ad innitum.
Aristotles later argument
against the theory of Forms was
more straightforward, and more
directly related to his studies of the
natural world. He realized that it
was simply unnecessary to assume
that there is a hypothetical realm
of Forms, when the reality of things
can already be seen here on Earth,
inherent in everyday things.
Perhaps because his father
had been a physician, Aristotles
scientic interests lay in what we

Using our senses and our
reason, we understand what
makes a dog a dog.

We recognize the
common characteristics
of dogs in the world.

We nd the truth
from evidence
gained in the world
around us.

THE ANCIENT WORLD 59
See also: Socrates 4649  Plato 5055  Avicenna 7679  Averroes 8283  Ren Descartes 116123 
John Locke 13033  Gottfried Leibniz 13437  George Berkeley 13841  David Hume 14853  Immanuel Kant 16471

Plato and Aristotle differed in their
opinion of the nature of universal
qualities. For Plato, they reside in the
higher realm of the Forms, but for
Aristotle they reside here on Earth.

of the world what the shared
characteristics are that make
things what they areand
the only way of experiencing
the world is through our senses.

The essential form of things

now call the biological sciences,
whereas Platos background had
been rmly based in mathematics.
This difference in background
helps to explain the difference in
approach between the two men.
Mathematics, especially geometry,
deals with abstract concepts that
are far removed from the everyday
world, whereas biology is very much
about the world around us, and is
based almost solely on observation.
Plato sought conrmation of a realm
of Forms from notions such as the
perfect circle (which cannot exist
in nature), but Aristotle found that
certain constants can be discovered
by examining the natural world.

Trusting the senses
What Aristotle proposed turned
Platos theory on its head. Far from
mistrusting our senses, Aristotle
relied on them for the evidence

to back up his theories. What he
learnt from studying the natural
world was that by observing the
characteristics of every example
of a particular plant or animal that
he came across, he could build up
a complete picture of what it was
that distinguished it from other
plants or animals, and deduce what
makes it what it is. His own studies
conrmed what he already
believedthat we are not born
with an innate ability to recognize
Forms, as Plato maintained.
Each time a child comes across
a dog, for example, it notes what it
is about that animal that it has in
common with other dogs, so that
it can eventually recognize the
things that make something a
dog. The child now has an idea
of dogginess, or the form, as
Aristotle puts it, of a dog. In this
way, we learn from our experience

Like Plato, then, Aristotle is
concerned with nding some kind of
immutable and eternal bedrock in a
world characterized by change, but
he concludes that there is no need
to look for this anchor in a world of
Forms that are only perceptible to
the soul. The evidence is here in the
world around us, perceptible through
the senses. Aristotle believes that
things in the material world are not
imperfect copies of some ideal
Form of themselves, but that the
essential form of a thing is actually
inherent in each instance of that
thing. For example, dogginess
is not just a shared characteristic
of dogsit is something that is
inherent in each and every dog. 

Everything that
depends on the action
of nature is by nature
as good as it can be.
Aristotle

60 ARISTOTLE

All men by nature
desire to know.
Aristotle

Aristotle classied many of the
different strands of knowledge and
learning that we have today, such
as physics, logic, metaphysics, poetics,
ethics, politics, and biology.

By studying particular things,
therefore, we can gain insight into
their universal, immutable nature.
What is true of examples in the
natural world, Aristotle reasons,
is also true of concepts relating
to human beings. Notions such
as virtue, justice, beauty, and
good can be examined in exactly
the same way. As he sees it, when
we are born our minds are like
unscribed tablets, and any ideas
that we gain can only be received
through our senses. At birth, we
have no innate ideas, so we can
have no idea of right or wrong. As
we encounter instances of justice
throughout our lives, however, we
learn to recognize the qualities that
these instances have in common,
and slowly build and rene our
understanding of what justice is.
In other words, the only way we
can come to know the eternal,
immutable idea of justice, is by
observing how it is manifested
in the world around us.
Aristotle departs from Plato,
then, not by denying that universal
qualities exist, but by questioning
both their nature and the means

by which we come to know them
(the latter being the fundamental
quesion of epistemology, or the
theory of knowledge). And it was
this difference of opinion on how
we arrive at universal truths that
later divided philosophers into two
separate camps: the rationalists
(including Ren Descartes,
Immanuel Kant, and Gottfried
Leibniz), who believe in a priori,
or innate, knowledge; and the
empiricists (including John Locke,
George Berkeley, and David Hume),
who claim that all knowledge
comes from experience.

Biological classication
The manner in which Plato and
Aristotle arrive at their theories tells
us much about their temperaments.
Platos theory of Forms is grand and
otherworldly, which is reected in
the way he argues his case, using
highly imaginative ctionalized
dialogues between Socrates and
his contemporaries. By contrast,
Aristotles theory is much more
down to earth, and is presented in
more prosaic, academic language.
Indeed, so convinced was Aristotle

that the truth of the world is to be
found here on Earth, and not in
some higher dimension, that he set
about collecting specimens of ora
and fauna, and classied them
according to their characteristics.
For this biological classication,
Aristotle devised a hierarchical
systemthe rst of its kind, and so
beautifully constructed that it forms
the basis of the taxonomy still in
use today. First, he divides the
natural world into living and
nonliving things, then he turns his
attention to classifying the living
world. His next division is between
plants and animals, which involves
the same kind of thinking that
underpins his theory of universal
qualities: we may be able to
distinguish between a plant and
an animal almost without thinking,
but how do we know how to make
that distinction? The answer, for
Aristotle, is in the shared features
of either category. All plants share
the form plant, and all animals
share the form animal. And once
we understand the nature of those
forms, we can then recognize them
in each and every instance.
This fact becomes more apparent
the more Aristotle subdivides the
natural world. In order to classify a
specimen as a sh, for example, we
have to recognize what it is that
makes a sh a shwhich, again,
can be known through experience
and requires no innate knowledge
at all. As Aristotle builds up a
complete classication of all living
things, from the simplest organisms
to human beings, this fact is
conrmed again and again.

Teleological explanation
Another fact that became obvious
to Aristotle as he classied the
natural world is that the form
of a creature is not just a matter
of its physical characteristics, such

THE ANCIENT WORLD 61
as its skin, fur, feather, or scales,
but also a matter of what it does,
and how it behaveswhich, for
Aristotle, has ethical implications.
To understand the link with
ethics, we need rst to appreciate
that for Aristotle everything in
the world is fully explained by four
causes that fully account for a
things existence. These four causes
are: the material cause, or what a
thing is made of; the formal cause,
or the arrangement or shape of a

thing; the efcient cause, or how
a thing is brought into being; and
the nal cause, or the function or
purpose of a thing. And it is this
last type of cause, the nal cause,
that relates to ethicsa subject
which, for Aristotle, is not separate
from science, but rather a logical
extension of biology.
An example that Aristotle gives
is that of an eye: the nal cause
of an eyeits functionis to see.
This function is the purpose, or

Aristotles classication of living things is
the rst detailed examination of the natural world.
It proceeds from general observations about the
characteristics shared by all animals, and then
subdivides into ever more precise categories.

telos, of the eyetelos is a Greek
word that gives us teleology, or
the study of purpose in nature. A
teleological explanation of a thing
is therefore an account of a things
purpose, and to know the purpose
of a thing is also to know what a
good or a bad version of a thing
isa good eye for example, is one
that sees well.
In the case of humans, a good
life is therefore one in which we
fulll our purpose, or use all the
characteristics that make us
human to the full. A person can be
considered good if he uses the
characteristics he was born with,
and can only be happy by using all
his capabilities in the pursuit of
virtuethe highest form of which,
for Aristotle, is wisdom. Which
brings us full circle back to the
question of how we can recognize
the thing that we call virtueand
for Aristotle, again, the answer is
by observation. We understand the
nature of the good life by seeing
it in the people around us.

The syllogism
In the process of classication,
Aristotle formulates a systematic
form of logic which he applies
to each specimen to determine 

Does it y?
Yes

Does it have feathers?

Yes

No

No

Does it have scales?

Yes

No

Linnaeus and Cuvier
have been my two gods,
though in very different
ways, but they were mere
schoolboys to old Aristotle.
Charles Darwin

62 ARISTOTLE
Socrates is mortal is the undeniable conclusion
to the most famous syllogism in history. Aristotles
syllogisma simple deduction from two premises
to a conclusionwas the rst formal system of logic.

All men are mortal.

Socrates is a man.

Therefore Socrates
is mortal.

whether it belongs to a certain
category. For example, one of the
characteristics common to all
reptiles is that they are cold-blooded;
so, if this particular specimen is
warm-blooded, then it cannot be a
reptile. Likewise, a characteristic
common to all mammals is that
they suckle their young; so, if this
specimen is a mammal, it will suckle
its young. Aristotle sees a pattern
in this way of thinkingthat of
three propositions consisting of
two premises and a conclusion, for
example in the form: if As are Xs,
and B is an A, then B is an X.
The syllogism, as this form of
reasoning is known, is the rst
formal system of logic ever devised,
and it remained the basic model for
logic up until the 19th century.
But the syllogism was more than
simply a by-product of Aristotles
systematic classication of the
natural world. By using analytical
reasoning in the form of logic,
Aristotle realized that the power
of reason was something that did
not rely on the senses, and that
it must therefore be an innate
characteristicpart of what it is
to be human. Although we have no
innate ideas, we do possess this

innate faculty, which is necessary
for us to learn from experience.
And as he applied this fact to his
hierarchical system, he saw that
the innate power of reason is what
distinguishes us from all other
living creatures, and placed us at
the top of the hierarchy.

Decline of Classical Greece
The sheer scope of Aristotles ideas,
and the revolutionary way in which
he overturns Platos theory of Forms,
should have ensured that his
philosophy had a far greater impact
than it did during his lifetime. That
is not to say that his work was
without faulthis geography and
astronomy were awed; his ethics
supported the use of slaves and
considered women to be inferior
human beings; and his logic was
incomplete by modern standards.
However, what he got right
amounted to a revolution both
in philosophy and in science.
But Aristotle lived at the end of
an era. Alexander the Great, whom
he taught, died shortly before him,
and so began the Hellenistic period
of Greek history which saw a decline
in Athens inuence. The Roman
Empire was becoming the dominant

Every action must be
due to one or other of
seven causes: chance,
nature, compulsion,
habit, reasoning,
anger, or appetite.
Aristotle

power in the Mediterranean, and the
philosophy it adopted from Greece
was that of the Stoics. The rival
schools of Plato and Aristotle
Platos Academy and the Lyceum
Aristotle founded in Athens
continued to operate, but they
had lost their former eminence.
As a result of this neglect, many
of Aristotles writings were lost. It
is believed that he wrote several
hundred treatises and dialogues
explaining his theories, but all that
remain are fragments of his work,
mainly in the form of lectures and
teachers notes. Luckily for posterity,
these were preserved by his
followers, and there is enough
contained in them to give a picture
of the full range of his work.

Aristotles legacy
With the emergence of Islam in the
7th century CE, Aristotles works
were translated into Arabic and
spread throughout the Islamic world,
becoming essential reading for
Middle Eastern scholars such as
Avicenna and Averroes. In Western
Europe, however, Boethiuss Latin
translation of Aristotles treatise on
logic (made in the 6th century CE)
remained the only work of Aristotles

THE ANCIENT WORLD 63

The inuence of Aristotle on the
history of thought can be seen in
the Great Chain of Being, a medieval
Christian depiction of life as a hierarchy
in which with God presides over all.

available until the 9th century CE,
when all of Aristotles works began
to be translated from Arabic into
Latin. It was also at this time that
his ideas were collected into the
the books we know todaysuch as
Physics, The Nicomachean Ethics,

Aristotle

and the Organon. In the 13th
century, Thomas Aquinas braved
a ban on Aristotles work and
integrated it into Christian
philosophy, in the same way that
St. Augustine had adopted Plato,
and Plato and Aristotle came to
lock horns again.
Aristotles notes on logic (laid
out in the Organon) remained the
standard text on logic until the
emergence of mathematical logic
in the 19th century. Likewise,
his classication of living things
dominated Western thinking
throughout the Middle Ages,
becoming the Christian scala
naturae (the ladder of nature),
or the Great Chain of Being. This
depicted the whole of creation
dominated by man, who stood
second only to God. And during the
Renaissance, Aristotles empirical
method of enquiry held sway.
In the 17th century, the debate
between empiricists and rationalists
reached its zenith after Ren
Descartes published his Discourse
on the Method. Descartes, and
Leibniz and Kant after him, chose
the rationalist route; in response,
Locke, Berkeley, and Hume lined
up as the empiricist opposition.
Born in Stagira, Chalcidice, in
the northeast region of modern
Greece, Aristotle was the son of
a physician to the royal family
of Macedon, and was educated as
a member of the aristocracy. He
was sent to Platos Academy in
Athens at the age of 17, and spent
almost 20 years there both as a
student and a teacher. When
Plato died, Aristotle left Athens
for Ionia, and spent several years
studying the wildlife of the area.
He was then appointed tutor at
the Macedonian court, where he
taught the young Alexander the
Great and continued his studies.

There is nothing in
the mind except was
rst in the senses.
John Locke

Again, the differences between the
philosophers were as much about
temperament as they were about
substancethe Continental versus
the English, the poetic versus the
academic, the Platonic versus the
Aristotelian. Although the debate
died down in the 19th century,
there has been a revival of interest
in Aristotle in recent times, and
a reappraisal of his signicance.
His ethics in particular have
been of great appeal to modern
philosophers, who have seen in
his functional denition of good
a key to understanding the way
we use ethical language. 
In 335 BCE he returned to Athens,
encouraged by Alexander, and
set up the Lyceum, a school to
rival Platos. It was here that
he did most of his writing, and
formalized his ideas. After
Alexander died in 323 BCE,
anti-Macedonian feeling ared
up in Athens, and Aristotle
ed to Chalcis, on the island
of Euboea, where he died
the following year.
Key works
Organon, Physics (as compiled in
book form in the 9th century).

64

DEATH IS
NOTHING TO US
EPICURUS (341270 BCE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Epicureanism
BEFORE
Late 5th century BCE
Socrates states that seeking
knowledge and truth is the
key to a worthwhile life.
c.400 BCE Democritus and
Leucippus conclude that
the cosmos consists solely of
atoms, moving in empty space.

E

picurus grew up in a time
when the philosophy of
ancient Greece had already
reached a pinnacle in the ideas of
Plato and Aristotle. The main focus
of philosophical thinking was
shifting from metaphysics toward
ethicsand also from political to
personal ethics. Epicurus, however,
found the seeds of a new school of
thought in the quests of earlier
philosophers, such as Socrates
examination of the truth of basic
human concepts and values.

AFTER
c.50 BCE Roman philosopher
Lucretius writes De rerum
natura, a poem exploring
Epicuruss ideas.

Fear of death

1789 Jeremy Bentham
advocates the utilitarian idea
of the greatest happiness for
the greatest number.
1861 John Stuart Mill argues
that intellectual and spiritual
pleasures have more value
than physical pleasures.

Central to the philosophy that
Epicurus developed is the view
that peace of mind, or tranquillity,
is the goal of life. He argues that
pleasure and pain are the roots of
good and evil, and qualities such
as virtue and justice derive from
these roots, as it is impossible to
live a pleasant life without living
wisely, honorably, and justly, and
it is impossible to live wisely,
honorably, and justly without living
pleasantly. Epicurianism is often
mistakenly interpreted as simply
being about the pursuit of sensual
pleasures. For Epicurus, the
greatest pleasure is only attainable
through knowledge and friendship,
and a temperate life, with freedom
from fear and pain.

Terrifying images of the merciless
god of death Thanatos were used to
depict the pain and torment ancient
Greeks might incur for their sins, both
when they died and in the afterlife.

One of the obstacles to enjoying the
peace of a tranquil mind, Epicurus
reasons, is the fear of death, and
this fear is increased by the
religious belief that if you incur
the wrath of the gods, you will be
severely punished in the afterlife.
But rather than countering this fear
by proposing an alternative state
of immortality, Epicurus tries to
explain the nature of death itself.
He starts by proposing that when

THE ANCIENT WORLD 65
See: Democritus and Leucippus 45  Socrates 4649  Plato 5055
Aristotle 5663  Jeremy Bentham 174  John Stuart Mill 19093

The goal of life
is happiness.

Death is the end
of sensation,
so cannot be
physically
painful.



Death is the end
of consciousness,
so cannot be
emotionally
painful.

Epicurus
Our unhappiness
is caused by fear,
and our main
fear is of death.

Death is
nothing
to fear.

If we can
overcome fear
of death, we
can be happy.

we die, we are unaware of our
death, since our consciousness
(our soul) ceases to exist at the
point of death. To explain this,
Epicurus takes the view that the
entire universe consists of either
atoms or empty space, as argued
by the atomist philosophers
Democritus and Leucippus.
Epicurus then reasons that the soul
could not be empty space, because
it operates dynamically with the
body, so it must be made up of
atoms. He describes these atoms
of the soul as being distributed
around the body, but as being so
fragile that they dissolve when
we die, and so we are no longer
capable of sensing anything. If you

are unable to feel anything, mentally
or physically, when you die, it is
foolish to let the fear of death cause
you pain while you are still alive.
Epicurus attracted a small but
devoted following in his lifetime,
but he was perceived as being
dismissive of religion, which made
him unpopular. His thinking was
largely ignored by mainstream
philosophy for centuries, but it
resurfaced in the 18th century, in
the ideas of Jeremy Bentham and
John Stuart Mill. In revolutionary
politics, the tenets of Epicureanism
are echoed in the words of the
United States Declaration of
Independence: life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. 

Born to Athenian parents on
the Aegean island of Samos,
Epicurus was rst taught
philosophy by a disciple of
Plato. In 323 BCE, Alexander
the Great died and, in the
political conicts that
followed, Epicurus and his
family were forced to move
to Colophon (now in Turkey).
There he continued his studies
with Nausiphanes, a follower
of Democritus.
Epicurus taught briey
in Mytilene on the island of
Lesbos, and in Lampsacus on
the Greek mainland, before
moving to Athens in 306 BCE.
He founded a school, known
as the The Garden, consisting
of a community of friends and
followers. There he set down
in great detail the philosophy
that was to become known
as Epicureanism.
Despite frequent ill health,
and often being in great pain,
Epicurus lived to the age
of 72. True to his beliefs, he
described the last day of his
life as a truly happy day.
Key works
Early 3rd century BCE
On Nature
Prinicipal Doctrines,
Vatican Sayings

66

HE HAS THE MOST
WHO IS MOST
CONTENT WITH
THE
LEAST
DIOGENES OF SINOPE ( .404323 )
C

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Cynicism
BEFORE
Late 5th century BCE
Socrates teaches that the
ideal life is one spent in
search of truth.
Early 4th century BCE
Socrates pupil Antisthenes
advocates an ascetic life, lived
in harmony with nature.
AFTER
c.301 BCE Inuenced by
Diogenes, Zeno of Citium
founds a school of Stoics.
4th century CE St. Augustine
of Hippo denounces the often
shameless behavior of the
Cynics, although they become
the model for several ascetic
Christian orders.
1882 Friedrich Nietzsche
refers to Diogenes and his
ideas in The Gay Science.

BCE

P

lato once described
Diogenes as a Socrates
gone mad. Although this
was meant as an insult, it is not
far from the truth. Diogenes shares
Socrates passion for virtue and
rejection of material comfort, but
takes these ideas to the extreme.
He argues that in order to lead a
good life, or one that is worth living,
it is necessary to free oneself from
the external restrictions imposed
by society, and from the internal
discontentment that is caused
by desire, emotion, and fear. This
can be achieved, he states, by
being content to live a simple life,
governed by reason and natural
impulses, rejecting conventions
without shame, and renouncing
the desire for property and comfort.
Diogenes was the rst of a group
of thinkers who became known as
the Cynics, a term taken from the
Greek kunikos, meaning dog-like.
It reects the determination of the
Cynics to spurn all forms of social
custom and etiquette, and instead
live in as natural a state as possible.
They asserted that the more one

Rejecting worldly values, Diogenes
chose to live on the streets. He outed
convention, by eating only discarded
scraps and dressingwhen he actually
bothered to do soin lthy rags.

can do this, as Diogenes himself
did by living a life of poverty with
only an abandoned tub for shelter,
the nearer one will be to leading
the ideal life.
The happiest person, who in
Diogenes phrase, has the most,
is therefore someone who lives
in accordance with the rhythms
of the natural world, free from
the conventions and values of
civilized society, and content
with the least. 

See also: Socrates 4649  Plato 5055  Zeno of Citium 67
St. Augustine of Hippo 7273  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421



THE ANCIENT WORLD 67

THE GOAL OF
LIFE IS LIVING
IN AGREEMENT
WITH
NATURE
ZENO OF CITIUM ( .332265 )
C

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Stoicism
BEFORE
c.380 BCE Plato states his
thoughts on ethics and the
city-state in The Republic.
4th century BCE Diogenes
of Sinope lives in extreme
poverty to demonstrate his
Cynic principles.
AFTER
c.4045 CE Roman statesman
and philosopher Seneca the
Younger continues the Stoic
tradition in his Dialogues.
c.150180 Roman emperor
Marcus Aurelius writes his
12-volume Meditations on
Stoic philosophy.
1584 Flemish humanist
Justus Lipsius writes De
Constantia, combining
Stoicism with Christianity to
found a school of Neo-Stoicism.

BCE

T

wo main schools of
philosophical thought
emerged after Aristotles
death. These were the hedonistic,
godless ethic of Epicurus, which
had limited appeal, and the more
popular and longer-lasting Stoicism
of Zeno of Citium.
Zeno studied with a disciple of
Diogenes of Sinope, the Cynic, and
shared his no-nonsense approach
to life. He had little patience with
metaphysical speculation and came
to believe that the cosmos was
governed by natural laws that were
ordained by a supreme lawgiver.
Man, he declares, is completely
powerless to change this reality,
and in addition to enjoying its
many benets, man also has to
accept its cruelty and injustice.

control, and be indifferent to pain
and pleasure, poverty and riches.
But if a person does so, Zeno is
convinced that he will achieve a
life that is in harmony with nature
in all its aspects, good or bad, and
live in accordance with the rulings
of the supreme lawgiver.
Stoicism was to nd favor across
much of Hellenistic Greece. But it
drew in even more followers in the
expanding Roman empire, where it
ourished as a basis for ethics
both personal and politicaluntil it
was supplanted by Christianity in
the 6th century. 

Happiness is a good
ow of life.
Zeno of Citium

Free will
However, Zeno also declares that
man has been given a rational soul
with which to exercise free will.
No one is forced to pursue a good
life. It is up to the individual to
choose whether to put aside the
things over which he has little or no
See also: Plato 5055



Aristotle 5663



Epicurus 6465



Diogenes of Sinope 66

THE MED
WORLD
2501500

IEVAL

70 INTRODUCTION

Plotinus founds
Neo-Platonism,
a school of mystical
philosophy based on
the writings of Plato.

Crises brought on by both
internal and external forces
lead to the division of the
Roman Empire into east and
west. The western empire
falls within a century.

Boethius begins to
translate Aristotles
work on logic.

The prophet Muhammad
performs the Hejira, his
journey from Mecca to Medina,
marking the beginning of
the Muslim era.

C.260

395

C.510

622

P

313

39798

618

711

Constantine I proclaims
religious freedom within
the Roman Empire in the
Edict of Milan.

St. Augustine of
Hippo writes his
Confessions.

The Tang dynasty is
established in China,
bringing a Golden Age
of cultural development.

Conquest of
Christian Iberia
(now Spain and
Portugal) by
Muslim invaders.

hilosophy did not play a
large part in Roman culture,
other than Stoicism, which
was admired by the Romans for
its emphasis on virtuous conduct
and doing ones duty. The broader
philosophical tradition that had
been established by the Classical
Greeks was therefore effectively
marginalized under the Roman
Empire. Philosophy continued to be
taught in Athens, but its inuence
dwindled, and no signicant
philosophers emerged until Plotinus
in the 3rd century CE, who founded
an important Neo-Platonist school.
During the rst millennium of
the Common Era, Roman inuence
also waned, both politically and
culturally. Christianity became
assimilated into the Roman culture,
and after the fall of the empire in
the 5th century, the Church

became the dominant authority in
Western Europe, remaining so for
almost 1,000 years. The Greek idea
of philosophy as rational examination
independent of religious doctrine
sat uncomfortably with the rise of
Christianity. Questions about the
nature of the universe and what
constitutes a virtuous life were held
to be answered in the scriptures;
they were not considered subjects
for philosophical discussion.
Early Christian philosophers such
as St. Augustine of Hippo sought
to integrate Greek philosophy into
the Christian religion. This process
was the main task of scholasticism,
a philosophical approach that
stemmed from the monastic schools
and was renowned for its rigorous
dialectical reasoning. The work of
scholastic philosophers such as
Augustine was not so much an

exploration of questions such as
Is there a God? or Does man
have an immortal soul? as a search
for a rational justication for the
belief in God and an immortal soul.

The Dark Ages
As the Roman Empire shrank and
eventually fell, Europe sank into the
Dark Ages and most of the culture
it had inherited from Greece and
Rome disappeared. The Church
held the monopoly on learning,
and the only true philosophy that
survived was a form of Platonism
deemed compatible with
Christianity, and Boethiuss
translation of Aristotles Logic.
Elsewhere, however, culture
thrived. China and Japan in
particular enjoyed a Golden Age
of poetry and art, while traditional
eastern philosophies coexisted

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 71
The House of
Wisdom is
established in
Baghdad, attracting
scholars from around
the world to share
and translate ideas.

St. Anselm
writes the
Proslogion.

The Black Death
reaches Europe, killing
more than a third of the
continents population.

Fall of the Byzantine
Empire, the eastern
remnant of the Roman
Empire, when its capital
Constantinople is captured
by the Ottoman Turks.

832

107778

1347

1453

C.101420

1099

1445

1492

Avicenna (Ibn Sina)
writes his Kitab al-Shifa
(The Book of Healing).

Christian crusaders
capture the holy city
of Jerusalem.

Johannes Gutenberg
of Germany invents the
printing press, allowing
for a greater dissemination
of knowledge.

Christopher
Columbus crosses
the Atlantic and
reaches the
West Indies.

happily with their religions. In
the lands that had been part of
Alexander the Greats empire, the
Greek legacy commanded more
respect than in Europe. Arabic and
Persian scholars preserved and
translated the works of the Classical
Greek philosophers, incorporating
their ideas into Islamic culture from
the 6th century onward.
As Islam spread eastward into
Asia and across north Africa and
into Spain, its inuence began to be
felt in Europe. By the 12th century,
news of ideas and inventions from
the Islamic world were reaching as
far north as Britain, and European
scholars started to rediscover
Greek mathematics and philosophy
through Islamic sources. The works
of Aristotle in particular came as
something of a revelation, and they
sparked a resurgence of philosophical

thinking within the medieval
Christian Church. But whereas
Platos philosophy had been
comparatively easy to assimilate
into Christian thought, because it
provided rational justication for
belief in God and the immortal
human soul, Aristotle was treated
with suspicion by the Church
authorities. Nevertheless, Christian
philosophers including Roger
Bacon, Thomas Aquinas, Duns
Scotus, and William of Ockham
enthusiastically embraced the new
Aristotelianism and eventually
convinced the Church of its
compatibility with Christian faith.

A new rationality
Along with the philosophy that
revitalized the Church, the Islamic
world also introduced a wealth of
technological and scientic

knowledge to medieval Europe.
Aristotles scientic methods had
been rened to sophisticated levels
in Persia, and advances in chemistry,
physics, medicine, and particularly
astronomy undermined the authority
of the Church when they arrived
in Europe.
The re-introduction of Greek
thinking and the new ideas that led
to Europes Renaissance in the late
15th century sparked a change of
mood as people began to look more
toward reason rather than faith to
provide them with answers. There
was dissent even within the
Church, as humanists such as
Erasmus provoked the Reformation.
Philosophers themselves turned
their attention away from questions
of God and the immortal soul
toward the problems posed by
science and the natural world. 

72

GOD IS NOT
THE PARENT
OF EVILS

ST. AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO (354430 CE)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics

Humans are
rational beings.

APPROACH
Christian Platonism
BEFORE
c.400 BCE In Gorgias, Plato
argues that evil is not a thing,
but an absence of something.

In order to be
rational, humans must
have free will.

3rd century CE Plotinus
revives Platos view of
good and evil.
AFTER
c.520 Boethius uses an
Augustinian theory of evil in
The Consolation of Philosophy.

This means they must
be able to choose
between good or evil.

c.1130 Pierre Abelard rejects
the idea that there are not
evil things.
1525 Martin Luther, the
German priest who inspired
the Protestant reformation,
publishes On the Bondage
of the Will, arguing that the
human will is not free.

Humans can therefore
act badly or well.

God is not the
parent of evils.

A

ugustine was especially
interested in the problem
of evil. If God is entirely
good and all-powerful, why is there
evil in the world? For Christians
such as Augustine, as well as for
adherents of Judaism and Islam, this
was, and remains, a central question.
This is because it makes an obvious
fact about the worldthat it
contains evilinto an argument
against the existence of God.
Augustine is able to answer
one aspect of the problem quite
easily. He believes that although
God created everything that exists,
he did not create evil, because evil is
not a thing, but a lack or deciency
of something. For example, the evil
suffered by a blind man is that he is
without sight; the evil in a thief is
that he lacks honesty. Augustine
borrowed this way of thinking from
Plato and his followers.

An essential freedom
But Augustine still needs to explain
why God should have created the
world in such a way as to allow
there to be these natural and moral
evils, or deciencies. His answer
revolves around the idea that
humans are rational beings. He
argues that in order for God to

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 73
See also: Plato 5055
David Hume 14853



Plotinus 331



create rational creatures, such as
human beings, he had to give them
freedom of will. Having freedom of
will means being able to choose,
including choosing between good
and evil. For this reason God had
to leave open the possibility that
the rst man, Adam, would choose
evil rather than good. According
to the Bible this is exactly what
happened, as Adam broke Gods
command not to eat fruit from the
Tree of Knowledge.
In fact, Augustines argument
holds even without referring to
the Bible. Rationality is the ability
to evaluate choices through the
process of reasoning. The process is
only possible where there is freedom
of choice, including the freedom to
choose to do wrong.
Augustine also suggests a third
solution to the problem, asking us
to see the world as a thing of beauty.
He says that although there is evil
in the universe, it contributes to an
overall good that is greater than it

Boethius 7475



Pierre Abelard 333



could be without eviljust as
discords in music can make a
harmony more lovely, or dark patches
add to the beauty of a picture.

Explaining natural evils
Since Augustines time, most
Christian philosophers have tackled
the problem of evil using one of his
approaches, while their opponents,
such as David Hume, have pointed
to their weaknesses as arguments
against Christianity. Calling sickness,
for instance, an absence of health
seems to be just playing with words:
illness may be due to a deciency of
something, but the suffering of the
sick person is real enough. And
how are natural evils, such as
earthquakes and plagues, explained?
Someone without a prior belief
in God might still argue that the
presence of evil in the world proves
that there is no all-powerful and
benevolent God. But for those who do
already believe in God, Augustines
arguments might hold the answer. 

What made Adam
capable of obeying Gods
commands also made
him able to sin.
St. Augustine of Hippo

St. Augustine of Hippo
Aurelius Augustine was born
in 354 CE in Thagaste, a small
provincial town in North
Africa, to a Christian mother
and a pagan father. He was
educated to be a rhetorician,
and he went on to teach
rhetoric in his home town,
and at Carthage, Rome, and
Milan, where he occupied
a prestigious position.
For a while Augustine
followed Manichaeisma
religion that sees good and
evil as dual forces that rule
the universebut under the
inuence of Archbishop
Ambrose of Milan, he became
attracted to Christianity.
In 386, he suffered a spiritual
crisis and underwent a
conversion. He abandoned his
career and devoted himself to
writing Christian works, many
of a highly philosophical
nature. In 395 he became
Bishop of Hippo, in North
Africa, and he held this post
for the rest of his life. He died
in Hippo, aged 75, when the
town was beseiged and
sacked by the Vandals.
Key works

A world without evil, Augustine says,
would be a world without usrational
beings able to choose their actions.
Just as for Adam and Eve, our moral
choices allow for the possibility of evil.

c.38895 On Free Will
c.397401 Confessions
c.41327 On the City of God

74

GOD FORSEES
OUR FREE THOUGHTS
AND
ACTIONS
BOETHIUS ( .480525 )
C

CE

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology

God lives in the
eternal present.

God knows the future
as if it were the present.

I am free not to go
to the cinema today.

God knows that I will
go to the cinema today.

APPROACH
Christian Platonism
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Aristotle outlines the
problems of claiming as true
any statement about the
outcome of a future event.
c.300 BCE Syrian philosopher
Iamblichus says that what can
be known depends upon the
knowers capacity.
AFTER
c.125070 Thomas Aquinas
agrees with Boethius that God
exists outside of time, and so
is transcendent and beyond
human understanding.
c.1300 John Duns Scotus says
that human freedom rests on
Gods own freedom to act, and
that God knows our future, free
actions by knowing his own,
unchangingbut freewill.

God foresees our free
thoughts and actions.

T

he Roman philosopher
Boethius was trained in
the Platonist tradition of
philosophy, and was also a Christian.
He is famous for his solution to a
problem that predates Aristotle:
if God already knows what we are
going to do in the future, how can
we be said to have free will?
The best way to understand the
dilemma is to imagine a situation in
everyday life. For instance, this

afternoon I might go to the cinema,
or I might spend time writing. As it
turns out, I go to the cinema. That
being the case, it is true now (before
the event) that I will go the cinema
this afternoon. But if it is true now,
then it seems that I do not really have
the choice of spending the afternoon
writing. Aristotle was the rst to
dene this problem, but his answer
to it is not very clear; he seems to
have thought that a sentence such

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 75
See also: Aristotle 5663
Immanuel Kant 16471



Thomas Aquinas 8895

as I shall go to the cinema this
afternoon is neither true nor false,
or at least not in the same way as
I went to the cinema yesterday.

A God beyond time
Boethius faced a harder version
of the same problem. He believed
that God knows everything; not only
the past and the present, but also
the future. So if I am going to go
to the cinema this afternoon, God
knows it now. It seems, therefore,
that I am not really free to choose

Everything is
known, not according to
itself, but according to the
capacity of the knower.
Boethius

Boethius



John Duns Scotus 333



Benedictus Spinoza 12629

to spend the afternoon writing, since
that would conict with what God
already knows.
Boethius solves the problem by
arguing that the same thing can be
known in different ways, depending
on the nature of the knower. My dog,
for instance, knows the sun only as
something with qualities he can
senseby sight and touch. A person,
however, can also reason about the
category of thing the sun is, and
may know which elements it is made
of, its distance from Earth, and so on.
Boethius considers time in a
similar kind of way. As we live in
the ow of time, we can only know
events as past (if they have occurred),
present (if they are happening now),
or future (if they will come to pass).
We cannot know the outcome of
uncertain future events. God, by
contrast, is not in the ow of time.
He lives in an eternal present, and
knows what to us are past, present,
and future in the same way that we
know the present. And just as my
knowledge that you are sitting now
does not interfere with your freedom
to stop, so too Gods knowledge of
Anicius Boethius was a Christian
Roman aristocrat, born at a time
when the Roman Empire was
disintegrating and the Ostrogoths
ruled Italy. He became an orphan
at the age of seven and was
brought up by an aristocratic
family in Rome. He was extremely
well educated, speaking uent
Greek and having an extensive
knowledge of Latin and Greek
literature and philosophy. He
devoted his life to translating
and commenting on Greek texts,
especially Aristotles works on
logic, until he was made chief
adviser to the Ostrogothic king



Lady Philosophy and Boethius discuss
free will, determinism, and Gods vision
of the eternal present in his inuential
book, The Consolation of Philosophy.

our future actions, as if they were
present, does not stop them from
being free.
Some thinkers today argue that
since I have not yet decided whether
I shall go to the cinema this
afternoon, there is simply nothing
to be known about it, so even a God
who is all-knowing does not, and
cannot, know if I shall go or not. 
Theoderic. Some ve years later
he became a victim of court
intrigue, was wrongly accused
of treason, and sentenced to
death. He wrote his most
famous work, The Consolation
of Philosophy, while in prison
awaiting execution.
Key works
c.510 Commentaries on
Aristotles Categories
c.51316 Commentaries on
Aristotles On Interpretation
c.52326 The Consolation of
Philosophy

76

THE SOUL
IS DISTINCT
FROM
THE BODY
AVICENNA (9801037)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Arabic Aristotelianism
BEFORE
c.400 BCE Plato argues that
mind and body are distinct
substances.
4th century BCE Aristotle
argues that mind is the form
of the body.
c.800950 CE Aristotles works
are translated into Arabic for
the rst time.
AFTER
1250s60s Thomas Aquinas
adapts Aristotles account of
the mind and body.
1640 Ren Descartes argues
for dualism in his Meditations.
1949 Gilbert Ryle describes
dualism as a category mistake
in The Concept of Mind.

A

vicenna, also known as
Ibn Sn, is the most
important philosopher in
the Arabic tradition, and one of the
worlds greatest thinkers. Like his
predecessors, al-Kind and al-Frb,
and his successor, Averroes,
Avicenna self-consciously marked
himself out as a philosopher rather
than an Islamic theologian, choosing
to follow Greek wisdom and the
path of reasoning and proof. In
particular, he saw himself as a
follower of Aristotle, and his main
writings are encyclopedias of
Aristotelian philosophy.
However, these works explain
Aristotles philosophy as re-thought
and synthesized by Avicenna. On

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 77
See also: Plato 5055  Aristotle 5663  Al-Kind 332  Al-Frb 332
Thomas Aquinas 8895  Ren Descartes 11623  Gilbert Ryle 337

If I were blindfolded
and suspended in the
air, touching nothing



I would not know
that I have a body.

Avicenna
So my soul is not
a body, but something
different.

But I would know
that Imy self
or soulexists.

The soul is
distinct from
the body.

some doctrines, such as the idea
that the universe has always existed,
Avicenna kept to the Aristotelian
view despite the fact that it clashed
with Islamic orthodoxy, but in other
areas he felt free to depart radically
from Aristotle. One striking example
is his explanation of the relationship
between mind (self or soul) and body.

Mind and body are distinct
Aristotle claims that the body and
mind of humans (and other animals)
are not two different things (or
substances), but one unit, and that
the mind is the form of the human
body. As such, it is responsible for
all the activities a human being can
perform, including thinking. For this

reason Aristotle does not seem to
think it possible for anything to
survive the death of the body.
By contrast, Avicenna is one of
the most famous dualists in the
history of philosophyhe thinks
that the body and the mind are two
distinct substances. His great
predecessor in this view was Plato,
who thought of the mind as a
distinct thing that was imprisoned
in the body. Plato believed that at
the point of death, the mind would
be released from its prison, to be
later reincarnated in another body.
In seeking to prove the divided
nature of mind and body, Avicenna
devised a thought-experiment
known as the Flying Man. This 

Ibn Sn, or Avicenna as the
Europeans called him, was
born in 980 in a village near
Bukhara, now in Uzbekhistan.
Although he wrote mainly in
Arabic, the language of
learning throughout the
Islamic world, he was a native
Persian speaker. Avicenna
was a child prodigy, rapidly
surpassing his teachers not
only in logic and philosophy,
but also in medicine. While
still in his teens, he became
known to the Samanid ruler
Nuh ibn Mansur as a brilliant
physician, and was given the
use of his magnicent library.
Avicennas life was spent
in the service of various
princes, both as physician and
political adviser. He started
writing at the age of 21, and
went on to write more than
200 texts, on subjects as
diverse as metaphysics,
animal physiology, mechanics
of solids, and Arabic syntax.
He died when his medications
for colic were altered, possibly
maliciously, while on campaign
with his patron Al al-Dawla.
Key works
c.101420 Book of Healing
c.1015 Canon of Medicine
c.1030 Pointers and Reminders

78 AVICENNA
appears as a treatise, On the Soul,
within his Book of Healing, and it
aims to strip away any knowledge
that can possibly be disproved, and
leave us only with absolute truths.
It remarkably anticipates the much
later work of Descartes, the famous
dualist of the 17th century, who also
decided to believe nothing at all
except that which he himself could
know for certain. Both Avicenna
and Descartes want to demonstrate
that the mind or self exists because
it knows it exists; and that it is
distinct from the human body.

The Flying Man
In the Flying Man experiment,
Avicenna wants to examine what
we can know if we are effectively
robbed of our senses, and cannot
depend on them for information.
He asks us each to imagine this:
suppose I have just come into
existence, but I have all my normal
intelligence. Suppose, too, that I am
blindfolded and that I am oating in
the air, and my limbs are separated

from each other, so I can touch
nothing. Suppose I am entirely
without any sensations. None the
less, I will be sure that I myself exist.
But what is this self, which is me?
It cannot be any of the parts of my
body, because I do not know that I
have any. The self that I afrm as
existing does not have length or
breadth or depth. It has no extension,
or physicality. And, if I were able
to imagine, for instance, a hand,
I would not think that it belonged
to this self which I know exists.
It follows from this that the
human selfwhat I amis distinct
from my body, or anything physical.
The Flying Man experiment, says
Avicenna, is a way of alerting and
reminding oneself of the existence
of the mind as something other
than, and distinct from, the body.
Avicenna also has other ways
to show that the mind cannot be
something material. Most are
based on the fact that the type of
intellectual knowledge the mind
can grasp cannot not be contained

The secret conversation
is a direct encounter
between God and the soul,
abstracted from all
material constraints.
Avicenna

by anything material. It is easy to
see how the parts of physical, shaped
things t with the parts of a physical,
shaped sense organ: the image of
the wall that I see is stretched over
the lens of my eye, each of its parts
corresponding to a part of the lens.
But the mind is not a sense organ;
what it grasps are denitions, such
as Man is a rational, mortal animal.
The parts of this phrase need to be
grasped at once, together. The mind
therefore cannot be in any way like
or part of the body.

The immortal soul
Avicenna goes on to draw the
conclusion that the mind is not
destroyed when the body dies, and
that it is immortal. This did not
help to make his thinking more
palatable to orthodox Muslims, who
believe that the whole person, body
and mind, is resurrected and enjoys
the afterlife. Consequently, Avicenna
was attacked in the 12thcentury
by the great Islamic theologian
al-Ghazl, who called him a heretic
Avicennas medical knowledge
was so vast that it won him royal
patronage. His Canon of Medicine
inuenced European schools of
medicine until the mid-17th century.

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 79

But what is it
that I am?
A thinking thing.
Ren Descartes

thing that he cannot be deceived
about, he realizes, is that he exists.
This self is exactly the self which
Avicennas Flying Man is sure of,
when he has no other knowledge.
Like Avicenna, Descartes can then
conclude that the I, or self, is
completely distinct from the body,
and that it must be immortal.

The ghost in the machine

for abandoning the central Islamic
tenet of the resurrection of the dead.
But in the samecentury Avicennas
work was also translated into Latin,
and his dualism became popular
among Christian philosophers and
theologians. They liked the way his
interpretations of Aristotles texts
made them easily compatible with
the idea of an immortal soul.

The indubitable self
Some 200 years later, in the 1250s,
Thomas Aquinas championed a
more faithful interpretation of
Aristotle, in which the mind and
body are much more closely tied
together, and his views were widely
accepted by the theologians of the
16th and 17th centuries. But in 1640
Descartes returned to a dualism
that was nearer to Platos than
Aristotles, and his argument for
it was very like Avicennas.
Descartes imagines that there
is a demon who is trying to deceive
him about everything on which he
might possibly be deceived. The one
Philip Pullmans tale, Northern Lights,
picks up on the ancient Greek idea of a
persons soul, or daimon, being separate
to the body, by presenting it as an
entirely separate animal, such as a cat.

One very strong objection to the
dualism of Avicenna or Descartes
is the argument used by Aquinas.
He says that the self which thinks
is the same as the self which feels
sensations in the body. For instance,
I do not just observe that there is
a pain in my leg, in the way that a
sailor might notice a hole in his ship.
The pain belongs to me as much as
my thoughts about philosophy, or
what I might have for lunch.
Most contemporary philosophers
reject mind-body dualism, largely
because of the increasing scientic
knowledge of the brain. Avicenna
and Descartes were both very
interested in physiology and they
produced scientic accounts of
activities such as movement and
sensation. But the process of
rational thinking was inexplicable
with the scientic tools of their

times. We are now able to explain
quite precisely how thinking goes
on in different areas of the brain
though whether this means that we
can explain thinking without
reference to a self is not so clear.
An inuential 20th-century British
philosopher, Gilbert Ryle, caricatured
the dualists self as a ghost in the
machine, and tried to show that
we can explain how human beings
perceive and function within the
world without resorting to this
ghost of a self.
Today philosophers are divided
between a small number of dualists,
a larger number of thinkers who say
that the mind is simply a brain, and
the majority, who agree that thinking
is the result of the physical activity
of the brain, but still insist there is
a distinction between the physical
states of the brain (the gray matter,
the neurons, and so on), and the
thinking which derives from them.
Many philosophers, especially
continental European thinkers, still
accept the results of Avicennas
thought experiment in one central
way. It shows, they say, that we each
have a self with a rst-person view
of the world (the I) that cannot be
accommodated by the objective
view of scientic theories. 

80

JUST BY THINKING
ABOUT GOD WE CAN
KNOW
HE
EXISTS
ST. ANSELM (10331109)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Platonic-Aristotelian
BEFORE
c.400 CE St. Augustine of
Hippo argues for Gods
existence through our grasp
of unchanging truths.
1075 In his Monologion,
Anselm develops Augustines
proof of Gods existence.
AFTER
1260s Thomas Aquinas
rejects Anselms Ontological
Argument.
1640 Ren Descartes uses a
form of Anselms Ontological
Argument in his Meditations.
1979 American philosopher
Alvin Plantinga reformulates
Anselms Ontological Argument
using a form of modal logic
to establish its truth.

A

lthough Christian thinkers
believe as a matter of faith
that God exists, in the
Middle Ages they were keen to
show that Gods existence could
also be proved by rational argument.
The Ontological Argument invented
by Anselman 11th-century Italian
philosopher who worked on the
basis of Aristotelian logic, Platonic
thinking, and his own geniusis
probably the most famous of all.
Anselm imagines himself
arguing with a Fool, who denies
that God exists (see opposite). The
argument rests on an acceptance
of two things: rst, that God is
that than which nothing greater

We believe that
You [God] are that
than which nothing
greater can be thought.
St. Anselm

can be thought, and second,
that existence is superior to
non-existence. By the end of the
argument the Fool is forced to
either take up a self-contradictory
position or admit that God exists.
The argument has been accepted
by many great philosophers, such as
Ren Descartes and Baruch Spinoza.
But there have been many others
who took up the Fools side. One
contemporary of Anselms, Gaunilo
of Marmoutiers, said that we could
use the same argument to prove that
there exists somewhere a marvellous
island, greater than any island that
can be thought. In the 18th century
Immanuel Kant objected that the
argument treats existence as if it
were an attribute of thingsas if I
might describe my jacket like this:
its green, made of tweed, and it
exists. Existing is not like being
green: if it did not exist, there would
be no jacket to be green or tweed.
Kant holds that Anselm is also
wrong to say that what exists in
reality as well as in the mind is
greater than what exists in the
mind alone, but other philosophers
disagree. Is there not a sense in
which a real painting is greater
than the mental concept the painter
has before he starts work? 

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 81
See also: Plato 5055  St. Augustine of Hippo 7273
Ren Descartes 11623  Benedictus Spinoza 12629

Anselm



Thomas Aquinas 8895



The Fool

Do you agree that if
God existed he would be the
greatest thing that there could be
that than which nothing greater
can be thought?
Yes.

St. Anselm
And do you agree that that
than which nothing greater can be
thought exists in your mind?
Yes, in my mind
but not in reality.
But would you agree
that something that exists in
reality as well as in the mind is
greater than something that
exists in the mind alone?

Yes, I suppose so
an ice cream in my
hand is better than
one thats just in
my imagination.

So if that than which
nothing greater can be thought
exists only in the mind, it is less great
than if it existed also in reality.
Thats true.
The being that
really exists would
be greater.
So now you are saying
that there is something greater
than that than which nothing
greater exists?
That doesnt
even make sense.
Exactly. And the only
way around this contradiction
is to admit that God (that than which
nothing greater exists) does exist
both in thought and reality.

Anselms Ontological
Argument was written
in 107778, but acquired
its title from the German
philosopher Kant in 1781.

St. Anselm of Canterbury was
born in Aosta in Italy in 1033.
He left home in his twenties to
study at the monastery of Bec,
in France, under an eminent
logician, grammarian, and
Biblical commentator named
Lanfranc. Anselm became a
monk of Bec in 1060, then
prior, and eventually abbot in
1078. He traveled to England,
and in 1093 was made
Archbishop of Canterbury,
despite his protestations of
ill-health and lack of political
skills. This position put him in
conict with the Anglo-Norman
kings William II and Henry I,
as he tried to uphold the
Church against royal power.
These disputes led to two
periods of exile from England
for Anselm, during which he
visited the pope to plead the
case for the English Church
and his own removal from
ofce. Ultimately reconciled
with King Henry I, Anselm
died in Canterbury aged 76.
Key works
107576 Monologion
107778 Proslogion
109598 Why did God
become Man?
108086 On the Fall of
the Devil

82

PHILOSOPHY AND
RELIGION ARE NOT
INCOMPATIBLE
AVERROES (11261198)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Arabic Aristotelian
BEFORE
1090s Ab Hmid al-Ghazl
launches an attack on Islamic
Aristotelian philosophers.
1120s Ibn Bjja (Avempace)
establishes Aristotelian
philosophy in Islamic Spain.

A

verroes worked in the legal
profession; he was a qd
(an Islamic judge) who
worked under the Almohads, one of
the strictest Islamic regimes in the
Middle Ages. Yet he spent his nights
writing commentaries on the work
of an ancient pagan philosopher,
Aristotleand one of Averroes avid
readers was none other than the
Almohad ruler, Ab Yacqb Ysuf.
Averroes reconciles religion and
philosophy through a hierarchical
theory of society. He thinks that
only the educated elite are capable
of thinking philosophically, and

everyone else should be obliged to
accept the teaching of the Quran
literally. Averroes does not think
that the Quran provides a completely
accurate account of the universe if
read in this literal way, but says that
it is a poetic approximation of the
truth, and this is the most that the
uneducated can grasp.
However, Averroes believes that
educated people have a religious
obligation to use philosophical
reasoning. Whenever reasoning
shows the literal meaning of the
Quran to be false, Averroes says
that the text must be interpreted;

AFTER
1270 Thomas Aquinas
criticizes the Averroists for
accepting conicting truths
from Christianity and
Aristotelian philosophy.
1340s Moses of Narbonne
publishes commentaries on
Averroes work.
1852 French philosopher
Ernest Renan publishes a
study of Averroes, on the
basis of which he becomes an
important inuence on modern
Islamic political thought.

true.

But some parts of it are
demonstrably false.

Philosophy and
religion are not
incompatible.

The text is a poetic truth,
and must be interpreted using
philosophical reasoning.

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 83
See also: Plato 5055  Aristotle 5663
Moses of Narbonne 334

Philosophers believe
that religious laws are
necessary political arts.
Averroes

that is to say the obvious meaning
of the words should be disregarded
and the scientic theory
demonstrated by Aristotelian
philosophy accepted in its place.

The immortal intellect
Averroes is willing to sacrice some
widely-held Islamic doctrines in
order to maintain the compatibility
of philosophy and religion. For
instance, almost all Muslims believe
that the universe has a beginning,
but Averroes agrees with Aristotle
that it has always existed, and says
that there is nothing in the Quran

Averroes



Al-Ghazl 332



Ibn Bjja 333



Thomas Aquinas 8895

to contradict this view. However, the
resurrection of the dead, a basic
tenet of Islam, is harder to include
within an Aristotelian universe.
Averroes accepts that we must
believe in personal immortality,
and that anyone who denies this is
a heretic who should be executed.
But he takes a different position
from his predecessors by saying that
Aristotles treatise On the Soul does
not state that individual humans
have immortal souls. According to
Averroes interpretation, Aristotle
claims that humanity is immortal
only through a shared intellect.
Averroes seems to be saying that
there are truths discoverable by
humans that hold good for ever, but
that you and I as individuals will
perish when our bodies die.



of Aristotle and Averroes became
known as Averroists, and they
included Jewish scholars such
as Moses of Narbonne, and Latin
scholars such as Anicius Boethius
and Siger of Brabant. The Latin
Averroists acccepted Aristotle as
interpreted by Averroes as the truth
according to reasondespite also
afrming an apparently conicting
set of Christian truths. They have
been described as advocating a
double truth theory, but their view
is rather that truth is relative to the
context of enquiry. 

Later Averroists
Averroes advocacy of Aristotelian
philosophy (if only for the elite) was
shunned by his fellow Muslims. But
his works, translated into Hebrew
and Latin, had enormous inuence
in the 13th and 14th centuries.
Scholars who supported the opinions
Ibn Rushd, known in Europe as
Averroes, was born in 1126 in
Cordoba, then part of Islamic
Spain. He belonged to a family of
distinguished lawyers and trained
in law, science, and philosophy.
His friendship with another doctor
and philosopher, Ibn Tufayl, led
to an introduction to the Caliph
Ab Yacqb Ysuf, who appointed
Averroes chief judge and later
court physician. Ab Yacqb
also shared Averroes interest in
Aristotle, and commissioned him
to write a series of paraphrases of
all Aristotles works, designed for
non-specialists such as himself.

Some Muslims did not view philosophy
as a legitimate subject for study in the
12th century, but Averroes argued that
it was essential to engage with religion
critically and philosophically.

Despite the increasingly liberal
views of the Almohads, the
public disapproved of Averroes
unorthodox philosophy, and
public pressure led to a banning
of his books and personal exile in
1195. Reprieved two years later,
Averroes returned to Cordoba
but died the following year.
Key works
117980 Decisive Treatise
117980 The Incoherence of the
Incoherence
c.1186 Great Commentary on
Aristotles On the Soul

84

GOD HAS
NO ATTRIBUTES
MOSES MAIMONIDES (11351204)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Jewish Aristotelian
BEFORE
c.400 CE The philosopher
Pseudo-Dionysius establishes
the tradition of Christian
negative theology, which
states that God is not being,
but more than being.

M

aimonides wrote on both
Jewish law (in Hebrew)
and Aristotelian thought
(in Arabic). In both areas, one of his
central concerns was to guard
against anthropomorphizing God,
which is the tendency to think
about God in the same way as a
human being. For Maimonides, the
worst mistake of all is to take the
Torah (the rst part of the Hebrew
Bible) as literal truth, and to think
that God is a bodily thing. Anyone

860s John Scotus Eriugena
suggests that God creates
the universe from the nothing
which is himself.
AFTER
1260s Thomas Aquinas
moderates Maimonides
negative theology in his
Summa Theologiae.
Early 1300s Meister Eckhart
develops his negative theology.
184050s Sren Kierkegaard
claims that it is impossible
to provide any form of external
description of God.

who thinks this, he says, should
be excluded from the Jewish
community. But in the Guide of the
Perplexed, Maimonides pushes this
idea to its farthest extent, developing
a strand of thought known as
negative theology. This already
existed in Christian theology, and
it focuses on describing God only
in terms of what God is not.
God, Maimonides says, has no
attributes. We cannot rightly say
that God is good or powerful.

Attributes are either

accidental.

essential.

But God has
no accidents.

Essential attributes
dene.

God has
no attributes.

But God
is indenable.

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 85
See also: Johannes Scotus Eriugena 332  Thomas Aquinas 8895
Meister Eckhart 333  Sren Kierkegaard 19495

This is because an attribute is
either accidental (capable of change)
or essential. One of my accidental
attributes, for example, is that I am
sitting; others are that I have gray
hair and a long nose. But I would
still be what I essentially am even if
I were standing, red-haired, and had
a snub-nose. Being humanthat is,
being a rational, mortal animalis
my essential attribute: it denes
me. God, it is generally agreed, has
no accidental attributes, because
God is unchanging. In addition,
says Maimonides, God cannot have
any essential attributes either,
because they would be dening,
and God cannot be dened. So God
has no attributes at all.

Speaking about God
Maimondes claims that we can say
things about God, but they must be
understood as telling us about Gods
actions, rather than Gods being.
Most discussions in the Torah should
be understood in this way. So when



When the intellects
contemplate Gods essence,
their apprehension turns
into incapacity.
Maimonides

we are told that God is a creator,
we must understand this as stating
what God does, rather than the
sort of thing God is. If we were to
consider the sentence John is a
writer, we might normally take it
to mean that being a writer is Johns
profession. But Maimonides asks us
to consider only what has been
done: in this instance John has
written words. The writing has been
brought about by John but it does
not tell us anything about him.
Maimonides also accepts that
statements which seem to attribute
qualities to God can be understood
if they are taken as double negatives.
God is powerful: should be taken
to mean that God is not powerless.
Imagine a game in which I think of
a thing and tell you what it is not
(it is not large, it is not red...) until
you guess what it is. The difference
in the case of God is that we have
only the negations to guide us: we
cannot say what God is. 
The Mishneh Torah was a complete
restatement of Jewish Oral Law, which
Maimonides wrote in plain Hebrew so
that young and old could know and
understand all the Jewish observances.

Moses Maimonides
Moses Maimonides (also
known as Rambam) was born
in 1135 in Cordoba, Spain, into
a Jewish family. His childhood
was rich in cross-cultural
inuences: he was educated
in both Hebrew and Arabic,
and his father, a rabbinic
judge, taught him Jewish law
within the context of Islamic
Spain. His family ed Spain
when the Berber Almohad
dynasty came to power in
1148, and lived nomadically
for 10 years until they settled
rst in Fez (now in Morocco)
and then Cairo. The familys
nancial problems led
Maimonides to train as a
physician, and his skill led to
a royal appointment within
only a few years. He also
worked as a rabbinic judge,
but this was an activity for
which he thought it wrong
to accept any payment. He
was recognized as head of
the Jewish community of
Cairo in 1191, and after his
death his tomb became a
place of Jewish pilgrimage.
Key works
1168 Commentary on the
Mishna
116878 Mishneh Torah
1190 Guide of the Perplexed

86

DONT GRIEVE.
ANYTHING YOU LOSE
COMES ROUND IN
ANOTHER
FORM
JALAL AD-DIN MUHAMMAD RUMI (12071273)

ss

o
w

of l

the

an
d

ng
Anythi

um

usm, the mystical and
aesthetic interpretation of
the Quran, had been part
of Islam since its foundation in the
7th century, but had not always
been accepted by mainstream
Islamic scholars. Jalal ad-Din
Muhammad Rumi, better known
simply as Rumi, was brought up in
orthodox Islam, and rst came into
contact with Susm when his

ife.

nu
endl
ess conti

e
ur
present to the fut

in

on
e

an, is art of an
p

tc
th a

e

a

a
lw
is a

S

in one form

.

nt
ast
se
e
is lin
r
ked to the p

cl
ud
ing
m

AFTER
1273 Rumis followers found
the Mawlawi Order of Susm.

Today Rumis works continue
to be translated into many
languages around the world.

he
p

T

n
,i
se

10th century Alis mystical
interpretation of the Quran
becomes the basis for Susm.

1925 After the founding of a
secular Republic of Turkey,
the Mawlawi Order is banned
in Turkey. It remains illegal
until 1954, when it receives
the right to perform on
certain occasions.

y

644 Ali ibn Abi Talib,
Mohammeds cousin and
successor, becomes Caliph.

.
rm
another fo

BEFORE
610 Islam is founded by the
Prophet Mohammed.

rn i
n

r
v
e
ive
r
ythi
ng in the un

APPROACH
Susm

sr
eb
o

E

BRANCH
Islamic philosophy

se
st
o
exis
t

IN CONTEXT

dl
en

e

family moved from the eastern
edges of Persia to Anatolia in the
mid-13th century. The Su concept
of uniting with God through love
caught his imagination, and from
this he developed a version of
Susm that sought to explain the
relationship of man with the divine.
Rumi became a teacher in a Su
order, and as such he believed he
was a medium between God and

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 87
See also: Siddhartha Gautama 3033  Avicenna 7679
Hajime Tanabe 24445  Arne Naess 28283



Averroes 8283



death, and nor should we grieve a
loss. In order to ensure our growth
from one form to another, however,
we should strive for spiritual growth
and an understanding of the
divinehuman relationship. Rumi
believes that this understanding
comes from emotion rather than
from reasonemotion enhanced
by music, song, and dance.

Rumis legacy
The Mawlawi Order, or Whirling
Dervishes, dance as part of the Su
Sema ceremony. The dance represents
the spiritual journey of man from
ignorance to perfection through love.

man. In contrast to general Islamic
practice, he placed much emphasis
on dhikrritual prayer or litany
rather than rational analysis of the
Quran for divine guidance, and
became known for his ecstatic
revelations. He believed it was his
task to communicate the visions
he experienced, and so he wrote
them down in the form of poetry.
Central to his visionary philosophy
is the idea that the universe and
everything in it is an endless ow
of life, in which God is an eternal
presence. Man, as part of the
universe, is also a part of this
continuum, and Rumi seeks to
explain our place within it.
Man, he believes, is a link
between the past and future in a
continual process of life, death, and
rebirthnot as a cycle, but in a
progression from one form to another
stretching into eternity. Death and
decay are inevitable and part of
this endless ow of life, but as
something ceases to exist in one
form, it is reborn in another. Because
of this, we should have no fear of

The mystical elements of Rumis
ideas were inspirational within
Susm, and inuenced mainstream
Islam too. They were also pivotal
in converting much of Turkey from
Orthodox Christianity to Islam. But
this aspect of his thinking did not
hold much sway in Europe, where
rationalism was the order of the
day. In the 20th century, however,
his ideas became very popular
in the West, mainly because his
message of love chimed with the
New Age values of the 1960s.
Perhaps his greatest admirer in
the 20th century was the poet
and politician Muhammed Iqbal,
advisor to Muhammad Ali Jinnah,
who campaigned for an Islamic
state of Pakistan in the 1930s. 

I died as a mineral
and became a plant,
I died as a plant and
rose to animal, I died as
animal and I was Man.
Jalal ad-Din Rumi

Jalal ad-Din
Muhammad Rumi
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi,
also known as Mawlana (Our
Guide) or simply Rumi, was
born in Balkh, in a province
of Persia. When the Mongol
invasions threatened the
region, his family settled in
Anatolia, Turkey, where Rumi
met the Persian poets Attar
and Shams al-Din Tabrizi.
He decided to devote himself
to Susm, and went on to
write thousands of verses
of Persian and Arabic poetry.
In 1244 Rumi became
the shaykh (Master) of a Su
order, and taught his mysticalemotional interpretation of the
Quran and the importance of
music and dance in religious
ceremony. After his death,
his followers founded the
Mawlawi Order of Susm,
which is famous for its
Whirling Dervishes who
perform a distinctive dance
in the Sema ceremonya form
of dhikr unique to the sect.
Key works
Earlymid-13th century
Rhyming Couplets of Profound
Spiritual Meaning
The Works of Shams of Tabriz
What is Within is Within
Seven Sessions

THE UNIVERSE

HAS NOT ALWAYS

EXISTED
THOMAS AQUINAS (C. 12251274)

90 THOMAS AQUINAS
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Christian Aristotelian
BEFORE
c.340 BCE Aristotle says that
the universe is eternal.
c.540 CE John Philoponus
argues that the universe must
have a beginning.
1250s60s French theologians
adopt Philoponuss argument.
AFTER
1290s French philosopher
Henry of Ghent criticizes
Aquinas, saying the universe
cannot have always existed.
1781 Immanuel Kant claims
he can show that the universe
has always existed, and that
it has not always existed.
1931 Belgian priest and
scientist Georges Lematre
proposes the Big Bang theory
of the origins of the universe.

Thomas Aquinas

T

he opinions of people today
are still divided into those
that hold that the universe
had a beginning, and those that
hold that it has always existed.
Today we tend to look to physics
and astronomy for an answer, but
in the past this was a question for
philosophers and theologians. The
answer given by the Catholic priest
and philosopher Thomas Aquinas,
the most famous of all medieval
Christian philosophers, is especially
interesting. It is still a plausible
way of thinking about the problem,
and it also tells us a great deal about
how Aquinas combined his faith
with his philosophical reasoning,
despite their apparent contradictions.

Aristotles inuence
The central gure in Aquinass
thinking is Aristotle, the ancient
Greek philosopher whose work was
intensively studied by medieval
thinkers. Aristotle was certain that
the universe has always existed,
and that it has always been home
to different things, from inanimate
objects like rocks, to living species,
such as humans, dogs, and horses.
He argued that the universe is
changing and moving, and this
Thomas Aquinas was born in
1225 at Roccasecca in Italy. He
studied at the University of
Naples and then joined the
Dominican order (a new, highly
intellectual order of friars) against
the wishes of his family. As a
novitiate he studied in Paris and
then in Cologne under the German
Aristotelian theologian, Albert
the Great. Returning to Paris, he
became Master (professor) of
theology, before leaving to travel
around Italy teaching for 10 years.
Unusually, Aquinas was then
offered a second period of tenure
as Master at Paris. In 1273 he

can only be caused by change and
motion. So there could never have
been a rst change or motion: the
universe must have been moving
and changing for ever.
The great Arabic philosophers,
Avicenna and Averroes, were
willing to accept Aristotles view,
even though it put them at odds
with Islamic orthodoxy. Medieval
Jewish and Christian thinkers,
however, struggled to do so. They
held that, according to the Bible,
the universe has a beginning, so
Aristotle must be wrong: the
universe has not always existed.
But was this view something that
had to be accepted on faith, or
could it be refuted by reasoning?
John Philoponus, a Greek
Christian writer of the 6thcentury,
believed that he had found an
argument to show that Aristotle
must be wrong, and that the
universe had not always existed.
His reasoning was copied and
developed by a number of thinkers
in the 13th century, who needed to
nd a aw in Aristotles reasoning
in order to protect the teachings of
the Church. Their line of argument
was especially clever, because it
took Aristotles own ideas about
experienced something that
has been considered both some
sort of vision and a possible
stroke; after it, he said that all
he had done was mere straw,
and he never wrote again. He
died at the age of 49, and was
recognized as a saint by the
Catholic Church in 1323.
Key works
125659 Disputed Questions on
Truth
c.126574 Summa Theologica
1271 On the Eternity of the
Universe

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 91
See also: Aristotle 5663  Avicenna 7679
Pierre Ablard 333  William of Ockham 334




Averroes 8283  John Philoponus 332
Immanuel Kant 16471

Aristotle says that
the universe has
always existed.



John Duns Scotus 333



The Bible says that
the universe has not
always existed.

The world did have a
beginning, but God could
have created it in such a way
that it existed eternally.

Aquinas is anked by Aristotle
and Plato in The Triumph of Thomas
Aquinas. His understanding of ancient
philosophy was considered greater than
that of Averroes, who lies at his feet.

innity as a point of departure, but
turned them against his view of
the universe as eternal.

An innity of humans
According to Aristotle, the innite
is what has no limit. For instance,
the sequence of numbers is innite,
because for each number, there is
another higher number that follows.
Similarly, the universe has existed
for an innite time, because for each
day, there is a preceding day. In
Aristotles opinion, however, this is
a potential innity, as these days
do not coexist at the same time;
an actual innityin which an
innite number of things all exist
at the same timeis impossible.
Philoponus and his 13th-century
followers, however, think that this
argument presents problems that
Aristotle had not noticed. They point
to the fact that he believes that all

the types of living beings in the
universe have always existed. If this
were true, they say, it would mean
that there were already an innite
number of human beings by the
time Socrates was bornbecause
if they have always existed, they
existed then. But since Socrates
time, many more humans have been
born, and so the number of humans
born up until now must be greater
than innity. But no number can
be greater than innity.
In addition, these writers add,
Christian thinkers believe that
human souls are immortal. If this
is so, and an innite number of
humans has already existed, there
must be an innite number of human
souls in existence now. So there is
an actual innity of souls, not a
potential innity; and Aristotle has
said actual innity is impossible.
With these two arguments,
using Aristotles own principles as
a starting point, Philoponus and his
followers were condent they had
demonstrated that the universe
cannot always have existed.

Aristotle was therefore wrong; the
universe is not eternal, and this ts
perfectly with the Christian
doctrine that God created the world.
Aquinas has little time for this
line of reasoning. He points out that
the universe could have existed for
ever but that species such as
humans and other animals might
have had a beginning, and so the
difculties raised by Philoponus
and his followers can be avoided.
Despite his defence of Aristotles
reasoning, Aquinas does not 

There never was
a time when there
was not motion.
Aristotle

92 THOMAS AQUINAS

God could have
made the universe
without humans and
then made them.
Thomas Aquinas

beginningbut he also wants
to show that there is no aw in
Aristotles reasoning. He claims
that his Christian contemporaries
have confused two different points:
the rst is that God created the
universe, and the second is that the
universe had a beginning. Aquinas
set out to prove that in fact
Aristotles positionthat the
universe has always existed
could be true, even if it is also true
that God created the universe.

Creating the eternal
accept Aristotles assertion that the
universe is eternal, because the
Christian faith says otherwise; but
he doesnt think that Aristotles
position is illogical. Like Philoponus
and his followers, Aquinas wants
to show that the universe had a

Aquinas steps away from Philoponus
and his followers by insisting that
although it is true, as the Bible says,
that the universe had a beginning,
this is not a necessary (undeniable)
truth on logical grounds. As they all
agree, God created the universe
with a beginning, but he could just

as easily have created an eternal
one. If something is created by God,
then it owes its whole existence to
God, but that does not mean that
there must have been a time when
it did not exist at all. It is therefore
quite possible to believe in an
eternal universe that had been
created by God.
Aquinas gives an example of
how this might work. Suppose
there was a foot making a footprint
in the sand and it had been there
for ever. Although there would
never have been a moment before
the footprint was made, we would
still recognize the foot as the cause
of the footprint: if it were not for the
foot, there would not be a footprint.

Aquinas and synthesis
Historians sometimes say that
Aquinas synthesized Christianity
and Aristotelian philosophy, as if
he took the parts he wanted from
each and made them into a smooth
mixture. In fact, for Aquinasas
for most Christiansthe teachings
of the Church must all be accepted,
without exception or compromise.
Aquinas was unusual, however,
because he thought that, properly
understood, Aristotle did not
contradict Christian teaching. The
question of whether the universe
always existed is the exception
that proves the rule. In this
particular case Aquinas thinks
that Aristotle was wrong, but he
was not wrong in principle, or in
his reasoning. The universe really
might have existed for ever, as far
as the ancient philosophers knew.
It was just that Aristotle, not having
access to Christian revelation, had
Aquinas believed the creation story
on faith, but claimed that some elements
of Christian belief could be rationally
demonstrated. For Aquinas, the Bible
and reason need never conict.

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 93
Aristotle believed that the universe was innite,
as each hour and day is succeed by another. Aquinas
disagreed, believing that the universe had a beginning,
but his respect for Aristotles philosophy led him to
argue that Aristotle could have been correct.

no way of knowing that it had not.
Aquinas believes that there are
a number of other doctrines central
to Christianity that the ancient
philosophers did not know and
could not have knownsuch as
the belief that God is a Trinity
made up of three persons, and that
one person of the Trinity, the Son,
became a human. But in Aquinass
opinion, whenever humans reason
correctly, they cannot come to any
conclusion which contradicts
Christian doctrine. This is because
both human reason and Christian
teaching come from the same
sourceGodand so they can
never contradict each other.
Aquinas taught in convents
and universities in France and Italy,
and the idea that human reason
could never conict with Christian
doctrine often placed him in erce
conict with some of his academic
contemporaries, especially those
who specialized in the sciences,
which at the time were derived
from the work of Aristotle. Aquinas
accused his fellow scholars of
accepting certain positions on
faithfor example, the position
that we each have an immortal

soulbut of saying at the same
time that according to reason,
these positions could be shown
to be wrong.

How we gain knowledge
Aquinas keeps to these principles
throughout his work, but they are
particularly clear in two central
areas of his thought: his account
of how we gain knowledge and his
treatment of the relation between
mind and body. According to
Aquinas, human beings acquire
knowledge through using their
senses: sight, hearing, smell, touch,
and taste. These sense-impressions,
however, only tell us what things
are like supercially. For example,
from where John sits, he has a visual
impression of a tree-shaped object,
which is green and brown. I, on the
other hand, am standing next to the
tree, and can feel the roughness of
its bark and smell the scent of the
forest. If John and I were dogs, our
knowledge of the tree would be
limited to these sense-impressions.
But as human beings we are able to
go beyond them and grasp what a
tree is in a rational way, dening it
and distinguishing it from other

types of plants and of living things.
Aquinas calls this intellectual
knowledge, because we gain it
by using the innate power of our
intellect to seize, on the basis of
sense-impressions, the reality that
lies behind them. Animals other
than humans lack this inborn
capacity, which is why their
knowledge cannot stretch beyond
the senses. All of our scientic
understanding of the world is based
on this intellectual knowledge.
Aquinass theory of knowledge
owes much to Aristotle, although
he claries and elaborates upon 

We should see whether
there is a contradiction
between something being
created by God, and its
existing forever.
Thomas Aquinas

94 THOMAS AQUINAS
the latters thinking. For Aquinas, as
a Christian thinker, human beings
are only one type of the various
sorts of beings that are capable of
knowing things intellectually: souls
separated from their bodies in the
afterlife, angels, and God himself
can also do this. These other
knowing beings do not have
to acquire knowledge through the
senses. They can directly grasp
the denitions of things. This
aspect of Aquinass theory has
no parallel in Aristotle, but it is a
coherent development of Aristotles
principles. Once again Aquinas
is able to hold Christian beliefs
without contradicting Aristotle,
but going beyond him.

The human soul
According to Aristotle, the intellect
is the life-principle or soul of a
human being. All living things have
a soul, he believes, which explains
their capacity for different levels of

what he calls life-activity, such
as growing and reproducing, for
plants; moving, sensing, seeking,
and avoiding, for animals; and
thinking for humans.
Aristotle believes that form is
what makes matter into the thing
that it is. Within the human body,
this form is the soul, which makes
the body into the living thing that
it is by giving it a particular set of
life-activities. As such, the soul is
tied to the body, and so Aristotle
thinks that, even in the case of
humans, the life-soul survives only
so long as it animates a body, and
at death it perishes.
Aquinas follows Aristotles
teaching about living things and
their souls, and he insists that a
human being has just one form:
his or her intellect. Although other
13th- and 14th-century thinkers
also adopted the main lines of
Aristotles view, they cut the
connection Aristotle had made

The laws of cause and effect lead us to look for the
cause of any event, even the beginning of the universe.
Aristotle supposed that God set the universe into
motion, and Aquinas agreed, but added that the
Prime MoverGodmust itself be uncaused.

?

between the intellect and the body,
so they could accommodate the
Christian teaching that the human
soul survives death. Aquinas,
however, refuses to distort
Aristotles position. This made it
far more difcult for him to argue
as he didfor the immortality of
the human soul, in yet another
example of his resolve to be a good
Aristotelian, and philosopher, while
remaining a faithful Christian.

After Aquinas
Since the Middle Ages, Aquinas
has come to be regarded as the
ofcial orthodox philosopher of
the Catholic Church. In his own
time, when translations of Greek
philosophy were being made from
Arabic, complete with Arabic
commentaries, he was one of the
thinkers keenest to follow Aristotles
train of philosophical reasoning,
even when it did not t neatly with
Christian doctrine. He always

caused this newtons cradle
to swing. But does the
existence of the universe
itself have a cause?

THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 95
Cosmic background radiation
provides evidence of the Big Bang
that started the universe, but we can
still argue, like Aquinas, that this was
not the only possible way for it to exist.

remained faithful to the Churchs
teachings, but this did not prevent
his thought from almost being
condemned as heretical shortly
after his death. The great thinkers
and teachers of the following
century, such as the secular
philosopher Henry of Ghent, and
the Franciscans John Duns Scotus
and William of Ockham, were all
far more willing to say that purely
philosophical reasoning, as best
represented by Aristotles
arguments, is often mistaken.
Scotus thought that Aquinass
Aristotelian view of the soul was
inadequate, and Ockham rejected
Aristotles account of knowledge
almost entirely. Henry of Ghent
explicitly criticized Aquinass view
that God could have created a
universe that always exists. If it
always existed, he argued, there
would be no possibility of its not
existing, and so God would not
have been free to create or not
create it. Aquinass supreme
condence in the power of reason
meant that he had more in common
with the greatest philosopher of
the previous century, the French
philosopher and theologian Pierre
Ablard, than he did with his
contemporaries and successors.

Coherent belief
Both Aquinass general view on
the relation between philosophy
and Christian doctrine, and his
particular treatment of the eternity
of the universe, remain relevant
in the 21st century. Today few
philosophers believe that religious
positions, such as the existence of
God or the immortality of the soul,

can be proved by philosophical
reasoning. But what some claim for
philosophy is that it can demonstrate
that although religious believers
hold certain doctrines as a matter
of faith, their overall views are no
less rational or coherent than those
of agnostics or atheists. This view
is an extension and development of
Aquinass constant endeavor to
develop a philosophically coherent
system of thought, while holding
on to his Christian beliefs. Reading
Aquinass works is a lesson in
tolerance, for Christians and
non-Christians alike.

science for an explanation of how
the universe began, the arguments
of Aquinas show that philosophy is
still relevant to how we think about
the subject. He demonstrates how
philosophy can provide the tools for
intelligent enquiry, allowing us to
investigate not what happens to be
the case, but what is possible and
what is impossible, and what are
intelligible questions to ask. Is it or
is it not coherent to believe that the
universe had a beginning? This is
still a question for philosophers, and
no amount of theoretical physics
will be able to answer it. 

The role of philosophy
Today, we do not look to philosophy
to tell us whether or not the universe
has always existed, and most of us
do not turn to the Bible, as Aquinas
and other medieval philosophers
did. Instead we look to physics,
in particular to the theory of the
Big Bang proposed by modern
scientists, including the British
physicist and cosmologist Stephen
Hawking. This theory states that
the universe expanded from a state
of extremely high temperature and
density at a particular point in time.
Though most of us now turn to

One may say that
time had a beginning at
the Big Bang, in the sense
that earlier times simply
would not be dened.
Stephen Hawking

96

GOD IS THE
NOT-OTHER

NIKOLAUS VON KUES (14011464)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Christian Platonism
BEFORE
380360 BCE Plato writes on
the Good or the One as
the ultimate source of reason,
knowledge, and all existence.
Late 5th century CE
The Greek theologian and
philosopher Dionysius the
Areopagite describes God
as above being.
c.860 Johannes Scotus
Eriugena promotes the ideas
of Dionysius the Areopagite.
AFTER
1492 Giovanni Pico della
Mirandolas On Being and
the One marks a turning
point in Renaissance
thinking about God.
1991 French philosopher
Jean-Luc Marion explores the
theme of God as not a being.

N

ikolaus von Kues belongs
to a long tradition of
medieval philosophers
who attempt to describe the nature
of God, stressing how God is unlike
anything that the human mind is
capable of grasping. Von Kues
begins with the idea that we gain
knowledge by using our reason to
dene things. So in order to know
God, he deduces that we must try
to dene the basic nature of God.
Plato describes the Good or
the One as the ultimate source of
all other forms and knowledge, and

some early Christian theologians
talk of God as above being. Von
Kues, writing around 1440, goes
further, stating that God is what
comes before everything, even
before the possibility of something
existing. Yet reason tells us the
possibility of any phenomenon
existing must come before its
actual existence. It is impossible
for something to come into being
before the possibility of it arises.
The conclusion that von Kues
comes to, therefore, is that
something that is said to do this
must be described as Not-other.

Beyond apprehension

Whatever-I-know
is not God and
whatever-I-conceive
is not like God.
Nikolaus von Kues

However, the use of the word
thing in the line of reasoning that
von Kues adopts is misleading, as
the Not-other has no substance.
It is, according to von Kues, beyond
apprehension, and is before all
things in such a way that they
are not subsequent to it, but exist
through it. For this reason too,
von Kues thinks Not-other comes
closer to a denition of God than
any other term. 

See also: Plato 5055  Johannes Scotus Eriugena 332
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola 334



Meister Eckhart 333



THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 97

TO KNOW NOTHING
IS
THE
HAPPIEST
LIFE
DESIDERIUS ERASMUS (14661536)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Humanism
BEFORE
354430 CE St. Augustine
of Hippo integrates Platonism
into Christianity.
c.12651274 Thomas Aquinas
combines Aristotelian and
Christian philosophy in his
Summa Theologica.
AFTER
1517 Theologian Martin
Luther writes The Ninety-Five
Theses, protesting against
clerical abuses. It triggers the
start of the Reformation.
1637 Ren Descartes writes
Discourse on the Method,
putting human beings at the
center of philosophy.
1689 John Locke argues
for separation of government
and religion in A Letter
Concerning Toleration.

T

he treatise In Praise
of Folly, which Erasmus
wrote in 1509, reects
the Humanist ideas that were
beginning to ood across Europe
during the early years of the
Renaissance, and were to play
a key role in the Reformation. It
is a witty satire on the corruption
and doctrinal wranglings of the
Catholic Church. However, it also
has a serious message, stating that
follyby which Erasmus meant
naive ignoranceis an essential
part of being human, and is what
ultimately brings us the most
happiness and contentment. He
goes on to claim that knowledge,
on the other hand, can be a burden
and can lead to complications that
may make for a troublesome life.

Faith and folly
Religion is a form of folly too,
Erasmus states, in that true belief
can only ever be based on faith,
never on reason. He dismisses the
mixing of ancient Greek rationalism
with Christian theology by medieval
philosophers, such as St. Augustine

of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas,
as theological intellectualizing,
claiming that it is the root cause
of the corruption of religious faith.
Instead, Erasmus advocates a
return to simple heartfelt beliefs,
with individuals forming a personal
relationship with God, and not one
prescribed by Catholic doctrine.
Erasmus advises us to embrace
what he sees as the true spirit of
the Scripturessimplicity, naivety,
and humility. These, he says, are
the fundamental human traits that
hold the key to a happy life. 

Happiness is
reached when a
person is ready to
be what he is.
Desiderius Erasmus

See also: St. Augustine of Hippo 7273  Thomas Aquinas 8895
Ren Descartes 11623  John Locke 13033



RENAISS
AND THE
OF
REAS
15001750

ANCE
AGE
ON

100 INTRODUCTION

Niccol
Machiavelli
publishes
The Prince.

Nicolaus Copernicus proposes
that Earth orbits the Sun,
in opposition to the Christian
view that Earth lies at the
center of the universe.

Francis Bacons
New Organon is
published, proposing
a new approach to
investigating nature.

Ren Descartes
writes his Meditations.

1513

1543

1620

1641

T

1517

1593

1633

1644

Martin Luther nails his
95Theses to the door of
Castle Church in
Wittenberg, triggering
the Reformation.

The Edict of Nantes
is issued by Henri IV,
granting Protestants rights
within Catholic France.

Galileo Galilei is
excommunicated by the
Church and imprisoned
for life, for upholding
the theory that Earth
revolves around the Sun.

The last ruling
dynasty of
China, the Qing
(Manchu) dynasty,
takes power.

he Renaissancea cultural
rebirth of extraordinary
creativity in Europebegan
in 14th-century Florence. It was to
spread across Europe, lasting until
the 17th century, and it is now
viewed as the bridge between the
medieval and modern periods.
Marked by a renewed interest in the
whole of Greek and Latin Classical
culturenot just the philosophical
and mathematical texts assimilated
by medieval Scholasticismit was
a movement that viewed humans,
not God, at its center. This new
humanism was reected rst in the
art and then the political and social
structure of Italian society; republics
such as Florence and Venice soon
abandoned medieval feudalism
in favor of plutocracies where
commerce ourished alongside
the new scientic discoveries.

By the end of the 15th century,
Renaissance ideas had spread
across Europe and virtually eclipsed
the Churchs monopoly of learning.
Although Christian philosophers
such as Erasmus and Thomas More
had contributed to the arguments
within the Church that had sparked
the Reformation, a purely secular
philosophy had yet to emerge.
Unsurprisingly, the rst truly
Renaissance philosopher was a
Florentine  Niccol Machiavelli 
and his philosophy marked a
denitive movement from the
theological to the political.

The Age of Reason
The nal nail in the cofn of the
Churchs authority came from
science. First Nicolaus Copernicus,
then Johannes Kepler, and nally
Galileo Galilei showed that the

Ptolemaic model of the universe
with Earth at its center was
mistaken, and their demonstrations
overturned centuries of Christian
teaching. The Church fought back,
ultimately imprisoning Galileo for
heresy, but advances in all the
sciences soon followed those in
astronomy, providing alternative
explanations for the workings of
the universe, and a basis for a new
kind of philosophy.
The victory of rational, scientic
discovery over Christian dogma
epitomized the thinking of the
17th century. British philosophers,
notably Francis Bacon and Thomas
Hobbes, took the lead in integrating
scientic and philosophical
reasoning. It was the beginning
of a period that became known as
the Age of Reason, which produced
the rst great modern philosophers

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 101

The execution of King
Charles I brings an
end to the English
Civil War.

Isaac Newton
begins compiling his
notes on Certain
Philosophical
Questions.

John Locke publishes
An Essay concerning
Human Understanding.

George Berkeley
publishes A Treatise
Concerning the Principles
of Human Knowledge.

1649

1664

1690

1710

1651

1670

1704

1721

Thomas Hobbes great
political work, Leviathan,
is published.

Blaise Pascals
Penses are published
posthumously.

Gottfried Leibniz
writes New Essays on
Human Understanding.

Britains rst factory
opens, accelerating
the Industrial
Revolution.

and revived the connection between
philosophy and science, especially
mathematics, that dated back to
pre-Socratic Greece.

The birth of rationalism
In the 17th century, many of the
most signicant philosophers in
Europe were also accomplished
mathematicians. In France, Ren
Descartes and Blaise Pascal made
major contributions to mathematics,
as did Gottfried Leibniz in Germany.
They believed that its reasoning
process provided the best model for
how to acquire all our knowledge of
the world. Descartess investigation
of the question What can I know?
led him to a position of rationalism,
which is the belief that knowledge
comes from reason alone. This
became the predominant belief in
continental Europe for the next

century. At the same time, a very
different philosophical tradition
was being established in Britain.
Following the scientic reasoning
espoused by Francis Bacon, John
Locke came to the conclusion that
our knowledge of the world comes
not from reason, but experience.
This view, known as empiricism,
characterized British philosophy
during the 17th and 18th centuries.
Despite the division between
continental rationalism and British
empiricism (the same division that
had separated the philosophies of
Plato and Aristotle), both had in
common the placing of the human
at their centers: it is this being
whose reason or experience leads
to knowledge. Philosophers on both
sides of the Channel had moved
from asking questions about the
nature of the universewhich were

being answered by scientists such
as Isaac Newtonto questioning
how we can know what we know,
and they now began to investigate
the nature of the human mind and
self. But these new philosophical
strands had moral and political
implications. Just as the Churchs
authority had been undermined by
the ideas of the Renaissance, so the
aristocracies and monarchies were
threatened by the new ideas of the
Enlightenment, as this period came
to be known. If the old rulers were
removed from power, what sort of
society was to replace them?
In Britain, Hobbes and Locke
had laid the foundations for
democratic thinking during the
turbulent 17th century, but it was
another 100 years before a
questioning of the status quo
began in earnest elsewhere. 

THE END
JUSTIFIES
THE MEANS

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI (14691527)

104 NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy

The success of a state
or nation is paramount.

APPROACH
Realism
BEFORE
1st century BCE Plato argues
in his Republic that the state
should be governed by a
philosopher-king.
1st century BCE The Roman
writer Cicero argues that the
Roman Republic is the best
form of government.
AFTER
16th century Machiavellis
peers begin to use the adjective
Machiavellian to describe
acts of devious cunning.
1762 Jean-Jacques Rousseau
argues that people should hold
on to their liberty and resist
the rule of princes.
1928 Italian dictator Benito
Mussolini describes The
Prince as the statesmans
supreme guide.

I

n order fully to understand
Machiavellis views on power,
it is necessary to understand
the background to his political
concerns. Machiavelli was born in
Florence, Italy, during a time of
almost constant upheaval. The
Medici family had been in open but
unofcial control of the city-state
for some 35 years, and the year of
Machiavellis birth saw Lorenzo de
Medici (Lorenzo the Magnicent)
succeed his father as ruler, ushering
in a period of great artistic activity
in Florence. Lorenzo was succeeded
in 1492 by his son Piero (known as

Whoever governs the
state or nation must
strive to secure...

...his or her own glory.

...the success of the state.

In order to do this, they
cannot be bound by morality.

The end justies
the means.

Piero the Unfortunate), whose
reign was short-lived. The French
under Charles VIII invaded Italy in
considerable force in 1494, and
Piero was forced to surrender and
then ee the city, as the citizens
rebelled against him. Florence was
declared a republic that same year.
The Dominican prior of the
San Marco monastery, Girolamo
Savonarola, then came to dominate
Florentine political life. The citystate entered a democratic period
under his guidance, but after
accusing the pope of corruption
Savonarola was eventually arrested

and burnt as a heretic. This led
to Machiavellis rst known
involvement in Florentine politics,
and he became Secretary to the
second Chancery in 1498.

Career and inuences
The invasion by Charles VIII in
1494 had sparked a turbulent period
in the history of Italy, which at the
time was divided into ve powers:
the papacy, Naples, Venice, Milan,
and Florence. The country was
fought over by various foreign
powers, mainly France, Spain, and
the Holy Roman Empire. Florence

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 105
See also: Plato 5055



Francis Bacon 11011



Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459



Karl Marx 196203

Lorenzo the Magnicent (14491492)
effectively ruled Florence from the
death of his father in 1469 until his
death. Though he ruled as a despot, the
republic ourished under his guidance.

Machiavelli was released from
prison within a month, but his
chances of re-employment were
slim, and his attempts to nd a new
political position came to nothing.
He decided to present the head of
the de Medici family in Florence,
Giuliano, with a book. By the time
it was ready Giuliano had died, so
Machiavelli changed the dedication
to Giulianos successor, Lorenzo.
The book was of a type popular at
the time: advice to a prince.

The Prince

was weak in the face of their armies,
and Machiavelli spent 14 years
travelling between various cities
on diplomatic missions, trying to
shore up the struggling republic.
In the course of his diplomatic
activities, Machiavelli met Cesare
Borgia, the illegitimate son of Pope
Alexander VI. The pope was a
powerful gure in northern Italy,
and a signicant threat to Florence.
Although Cesare was Florences
enemy, Machiavellidespite his
republican viewswas impressed
by his vigor, intelligence, and
ability. Here we see one of the
sources for Machiavellis famous
work, The Prince.
Pope Alexander VI died in 1503,
and his successor Pope Julius II
was another strong and successful

man who impressed Machiavelli
with both his military ability and
his cunning. But tension between
France and the papacy led to
Florence ghting with the French
against the pope and his allies,
the Spanish. The French lost, and
Florence with them. In 1512 the
Spanish dissolved the city-states
government, the Medicis returned,
and what was in effect a tyranny
under Cardinal de Medici was
installed. Machiavelli was red
from his political ofce and exiled
to his farm in Florence. His political
career might have revived under
the rule of the Medicis, but in
February 1513 he was falsely
implicated in a plot against the
family, and he was tortured,
ned, and imprisoned.

Machiavellis book The Prince was
witty and cynical, and showed a
great understanding of Italy in
general and Florence in particular.
In it, Machiavelli sets out his
argument that the goals of a ruler
justify the means used to obtain
them. The Prince differed markedly
from other books of its type in its
resolute setting aside of Christian
morality. Machiavelli wanted to 

How difcult it is
for a people accustomed
to live under a prince to
preserve their liberty!
Niccol Machiavelli

106 NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI
give ruthlessly practical advice to a
prince and, as his experience with
extremely successful popes and
cardinals had shown him, Christian
values should be cast aside if they
got in the way.
Machiavellis approach centers
on the notion of virt, but this is not
the modern notion of moral virtue.
It shares more similarities with the
medieval notion of virtues as the
powers or functions of things, such
as the healing powers of plants or
minerals. Machiavelli is writing
about the virtues of princes, and
these were the powers and functions
that concerned rule. The Latin root
of virt also relates it to manliness
(as in virile), and this feeds into
what Machiavelli has to say in
its application both to the prince
himself and to the statewhere

sometimes virt is used to mean
success, and describes a state
that is to be admired and imitated.
Part of Machiavellis point is
that a ruler cannot be bound by
morality, but must do what it takes
to secure his own glory and the
success of the state over which he
rulesan approach that became
known as realism. But Machiavelli
does not argue that the end justies
the means in all cases. There are
certain means that a wise prince
must avoid, for though they might
achieve the desired ends, they lay
him open to future dangers.
The main means to be avoided
consist of those that would make
the people hate their prince. They
may love him, they may fear him
preferably both, Machiavelli says,
though it is more important for a

Prince or republic

A ruler needs to know how to act
like a beast, Machiavelli says in The
Prince, and must imitate the qualities
of the fox as well as the lion.

A ruler must have the
ferocity of the lion to
frighten those who seek
to depose him.

prince to be feared than to be
loved. But the people must not
hate him, for this is likely to lead
to rebellion. Also, a prince who
mistreats his people unnecessarily
will be despiseda prince should
have a reputation for compassion,
not for cruelty. This might involve
harsh punishment of a few in order
to achieve general social order,
which benets more people in
the long run.
In cases where Machiavelli
does think that the end justies
the means, this rule applies only
to princes. The proper conduct of
citizens of the state is not at all the
same as that of the prince. But even
for ordinary citizens, Machiavelli
generally disdains conventional
Christian morality as being weak
and unsuitable for a strong city.

There are reasons to suspect that
The Prince does not represent
Machiavellis own views. Perhaps
the most important is the disparity
between the ideas it contains and
those expressed in his other main
work, Discourses on the Ten Books
of Titus Livy. In the Discourses
Machiavelli argues that a republic
is the ideal regime, and that it

A ruler must have the
cunning of the fox
to recognize snares
and traps.

It must be understood
that a prince cannot
observe all those things
which are considered
good in men.
Niccol Machiavelli

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 107
should be instituted whenever a
reasonable degree of equality
exists or can be established. A
princedom is only suitable when
equality does not exist in a state,
and cannot be introduced. However,
it can be argued that The Prince
represents Machiavellis genuine
ideas about how the ruler should
rule in such cases; if princedoms
are sometimes a necessary evil, it
is best that they be ruled as well as
possible. Moreover, Machiavelli did
believe that Florence was in such
political turmoil that it needed a
strong ruler to get it into shape.

Ruthlessness has been a virtue of
leadership throughout history. In the
20th century, the fascist dictator Benito
Mussolini used a mixture of fear and
love to hold on to power in Italy.

The world has become more
like that of Machiavelli.
Bertrand Russell

Pleasing the readers
The fact that The Prince was
written by Machiavelli in order to
ingratiate himself with the Medicis
is another reason to treat its
contents with caution. However, he
also dedicated the Discourses to
members of Florences republican
government. Machiavelli, it could
be argued, would have written
what the dedicatee wanted to read.
The Prince, however, contains
much that Machiavelli is thought to
have genuinely believed, such as
the need for a citizens militia
rather than reliance on mercenaries.

Niccol Machiavelli

The problem lies in discerning
which parts are his actual beliefs
and which are not. It is tempting to
divide them according to how well
they t with the intended readers
own beliefs, but that is unlikely to
give an accurate result.
It has also been suggested that
Machiavelli was attempting satire,
and his real intended audience was
the republicans, not the ruling elite.
This idea is supported by the fact
that Machiavelli did not write it in

Latin, the language of the elite, but
in Italian, the language of the people.
Certainly, The Prince at times reads
satirically, as though the audience
is expected to conclude: if that is
how a good prince should behave,
we should at all costs avoid being
ruled by one! If Machiavelli was
also satirizing the idea that the
end justies the means, then the
purpose of this small, deceptively
simple book is far more intriguing
than one might originally assume. 

Machiavelli was born in Florence
in 1469. Little is known of the rst
28 years of his life; apart from a
few inconclusive mentions in his
fathers diary, the rst direct
evidence is a business letter
written in 1497. From his writings,
though, it is clear that he received
a good education, perhaps at the
University of Florence.
By 1498, Machiavelli had
become a politician and diplomat
of the Florentine Republic. After
his enforced retirement on the
return of the Medicis to Florence
in 1512, he devoted himself to
various literary activities, as well

as persistent attempts to return
to the political arena. Eventually
he regained the trust of the
Medicis, and Cardinal Giulio
de Medici commissioned him to
write a history of Florence. The
book was nished in 1525, after
the cardinal had become Pope
Clement VII. Machiavelli died
in 1527, without achieving his
ambition to return to public life.
Key works
1513 The Prince
1517 Discourses on the Ten
Books of Titus Livy

108

FAME AND
TRANQUILLITY
CAN NEVER BE
BEDFELLOWS
MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE (15331592)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics

Tranquillity depends
upon detachment
from the opinion of others.

APPROACH
Humanism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle,
in his Nicomachean Ethics,
argues that to be virtuous, a
person must be sociable and
form close relationships with
others; only a bestial man or
a god can ourish alone.
AFTER
Late 18th century Anglican
evangelical clergyman Richard
Cecil states, Solitude shows
us what we should be; society
shows us what we are.
Late 19th century Friedrich
Nietzsche describes solitude
as necessary to the task of
self-examination, which he
claims can alone free humans
from the temptation just to
thoughtlessly follow the mob.

If we seek famewhich
is glory in the eyes of
otherswe must seek
their good opinion.

If we seek fame
we cannot
reach detachment.

Fame and
tranquillity can
never be bedfellows.

I

n his essay On Solitude
(from the rst volume of his
Essays), Montaigne takes up a
theme that has been popular since
ancient times: the intellectual and
moral dangers of living among
others, and the value of solitude.
Montaigne is not stressing the
importance of physical solitude, but
rather of developing the ability to
resist the temptation to mindlessly
fall in with the opinion and actions
of the mob. He compares our desire
for the approval of our fellow humans
to being overly attached to material
wealth and possessions. Both
passions diminish us, Montaigne
claims, but he does not conclude
that we should relinquish either,
only that we should cultivate a
detachment from them. By doing so,
we may enjoy themand even
benet from thembut we will not
become emotionally enslaved to
them, or devastated if we lose them.
On Solitude then considers
how our desire for mass approval
is linked to the pursuit of glory, or
fame. Contrary to thinkers such
as Niccol Machiavelli, who see
glory as a worthy goal, Montaigne
believes that constant striving
for fame is the greatest barrier to
peace of mind, or tranquility. He

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 109
See also: Aristotle 5663  Niccol Machiavelli 10207
Friedrich Nietzsche 21421

says of those who present glory as a
desirable goal that they only have
their arms and legs out of the
crowd; their souls, their wills, are
more engaged with it than ever.
Montaigne is not concerned
with whether or not we achieve
glory. His point is that we should
shake off the desire for glory in the
eyes of other peoplethat we
should not always think of other
peoples approval and admiration
as being valuable. He goes on to
recommend that instead of looking
for the approbation of those around
us, we should imagine that some
truly great and noble being is
constantly with us, able to observe
our most private thoughts, a being
in whose presence even the mad
would hide their failings. By doing
this, we will learn to think clearly
and objectively and behave in a
more thoughtful and rational
manner. Montaigne claims that
caring too much about the opinion



of those around us will corrupt us,
either because we end up imitating
those who are evil, or become so
consumed by hatred for them that
we lose our reason.

Glorys pitfalls
Montaigne returns to his attack
on the pursuit of glory in his later
writings, pointing out that the
acquisition of glory is often so
much a matter of mere chance
that it makes little sense to hold it
in such reverence. Many times Ive
seen [fortune] stepping out ahead
of merit, and often a long way
ahead, he writes. He also points
out that encouraging statesmen
and political leaders to value glory
above all things, as Machiavelli
does, merely teaches them never
to attempt any endeavor unless
an approving audience is on hand,
ready and eager to bear witness to
the remarkable nature of their
powers and achievements. 

Contagion is very
dangerous in crowds. You
must either imitate the
vicious or hate them.
Michel de Montaigne

Michel de Montaigne
Michel Eyquem de Montaigne
was born and brought up in
his wealthy familys chateau
near Bordeaux. However, he
was sent to live with a poor
peasant family until the age
of three, so that he would be
familiar with the life led by
the ordinary workers. He
received all his education at
home, and was allowed to
speak only Latin until the age
of six. French was effectively
his second language.
From 1557, Montaigne
spent 13 years as a member
of his local parliament, but
resigned in 1571, on inheriting
the family estates.
Montaigne published his
rst volume of Essays in 1580,
going on to write two more
volumes before his death in
1592. In 1580, he also set out
on an extensive tour of Europe,
partly to seek a cure for kidney
stones. He returned to politics
in 1581, when he was elected
Mayor of Bordeaux, an ofce
he held until 1585.
Key works

Montaigne experienced the results
of mindless mob violence during the
French Wars of Religion (156298),
including the atrocities of the St.
Bartholomew Day Massacre of 1572.

1569 In Defence of
Raymond Sebond
15801581 Travel Journal
1580, 1588, 1595 Essays
(3 volumes)

110

KNOWLEDGE
IS POWER
FRANCIS BACON (15611626)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
Empiricism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
sets observation and inductive
reasoning at the center of
scientic thinking.
13th century English scholars
Robert Grosseteste and Roger
Bacon add experimentation to
Aristotles inductive approach
to scientic knowledge.
AFTER
1739 David Humes Treatise
of Human Nature argues
against the rationality of
inductive thinking.

B

acon is often credited with
being the rst in a tradition
of thought known as British
empiricism, which is characterized
by the view that all knowledge
must come ultimately from sensory
experience. He was born at a time
when there was a shift from the
Renaissance preoccupation with
the rediscovered achievements of
the ancient world toward a more
scientic approach to knowledge.
There had already been some
innovative work by Renaissance
scientists such as the astronomer
Nicolaus Copernicus and the
anatomist Andreas Vesalius, but
this new periodsometimes called

Scientic knowledge
builds upon itself.

1843 John Stuart Mills
System of Logic outlines the
ve inductive principles that
together regulate the sciences.
1934 Karl Popper states that
falsication, not induction,
denes the scientic method.

Knowledge is
power.

the Scientic Revolutionproduced
an astonishing number of scientic
thinkers, including Galileo Galilei,
William Harvey, Robert Boyle,
Robert Hooke, and Isaac Newton.
Although the Church had been
broadly welcoming to science for
much of the medieval period, this
was halted by the rise of opposition
to the Vaticans authority during
the Renaissance. Several religious
reformers, such as Martin Luther,
had complained that the Church
had been too lax in countering
scientic challenges to accounts
of the world based on the Bible.
In response, the Catholic Church,
which had already lost adherents to

It advances steadily and
cumulatively, discovering
new laws and making new
inventions possible.

It enables people to do
things that otherwise
could not be done.

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 111
See also: Aristotle 5663  Robert Grosseteste 333
John Stuart Mill 19093  Karl Popper 26265



David Hume 14853



preconceptions on nature rather
than to see what is really there;
the idols of the marketplace, our
tendency to let social conventions
distort our experience; and the
idols of the theater, the distorting
inuence of prevailing philosophical
and scientic dogma. The scientist,
according to Bacon, must battle
against all these handicaps to gain
knowledge of the world.

Scientic method
Science, not religion, was regarded
increasingly as the key to knowledge
from the 16th century onward. This 1598
print depicts the observatory of Danish
astronomer Tycho Brahe (15461601).

Luthers new form of Christianity,
changed its stance and turned
against scientic endeavor. This
opposition, from both sides of the
religious divide, hampered the
development of the sciences.
Bacon claims to accept the
teachings of the Christian Church.
But he also argues that science
must be separated from religion,
in order to make the acquisition of
knowledge quicker and easier, so
that it can be used to improve the
quality of peoples lives. Bacon
stresses this transforming role for
science. One of his complaints is
that sciences ability to enhance
human existence had previously
been ignored, in favor of a focus on
academic and personal glory.
Bacon presents a list of the
psychological barriers to pursuing
scientic knowledge in terms that
he calls collectively the idols of
the mind. These are the idols of
the tribe, the tendency of human
beings as a species (or tribe) to
generalize; the idols of the cave,
the human tendency to impose

Bacon goes on to argue that the
advancement of science depends on
formulating laws of ever-increasing
generality. He proposes a scientic
method that includes a variation of
this approach. Instead of making
a series of observations, such as
instances of metals that expand
when heated, and then concluding
that heat must cause all metals to
expand, he stresses the need to
test a new theory by going on to
look for negative instancessuch
as metals not expanding when
they are heated.
Bacons inuence led to a focus
on practical experimentation in
science. He was, however, criticized
for neglecting the importance of
the imaginative leaps that drive all
scientic progress. 

By far the best proof
is experience.
Francis Bacon

Francis Bacon
Born in London, Francis Bacon
was educated privately, before
being sent to Trinity College,
Cambridge, at the age of 12.
After graduation, he started
training as a lawyer, but
abandoned his studies to
take up a diplomatic post in
France. His fathers death in
1579 left him impoverished,
forcing him to return to the
legal profession.
Bacon was elected to
parliament in 1584, but his
friendship with the treasonous
Earl of Essex held back his
political career until the
accession of James I in 1603.
In 1618, he was appointed Lord
Chancellor, but was dismissed
two years later, when he was
convicted of accepting bribes.
Bacon spent the rest of his
life writing and carrying out
his scientic work. He died
from bronchitis, contracted
while stufng a chicken with
snow, as part of an experiment
in food preservation.
Key works
1597 Essays
1605 The Advancement
of Learning
1620 Novum Organum
1624 Nova Atlantis

112

MAN IS A
MACHINE

THOMAS HOBBES (15881679)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Physicalism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
disagrees with Platos theory
of a distinct human soul and
argues that the soul is a form
or function of the body.
1641 Ren Descartes
publishes his Meditations on
First Philosophy, arguing that
mind and body are completely
different and distinct entities.
AFTER
1748 Julien Offray de la
Mettries The Man Machine
presents a mechanistic view
of human beings.
1949 Gilbert Ryle states that
Descartes idea that mind and
body are separate substances
is a category mistake.

A

lthough he is best known
for his political philosophy,
Thomas Hobbes wrote on a
wide range of subjects. Many of his
views are controversial, not least
his defence of physicalismthe
theory that everything in the world
is exclusively physical in nature,
allowing no room for the existence
of other natural entities, such as the
mind, or for supernatural beings.
According to Hobbes, all animals,
including humans, are nothing more
than esh-and-blood machines.
The kind of metaphysical theory
that Hobbes favors was becoming
increasingly popular at the time of
his writing, in the mid-17th century.
Knowledge in the physical sciences

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 113
See also: Aristotle 5663  Francis Bacon 11011
Julien Offray de la Mettrie 335  Gilbert Ryle 337

Nothing without
substance can exist.



Ren Descartes 11623



So everything in the
universe is physical.

Thomas Hobbes
Man is a
machine.

was growing rapidly, bringing
clearer explanations of phenomena
that had long been obscure or
misunderstood. Hobbes had met
the Italian astronomer Galileo,
frequently regarded as the father
of modern science, and had been
closely associated with Francis
Bacon, whose thinking had helped
to revolutionize scientic practice.
In science and mathematics,
Hobbes saw the perfect counter to
the medieval Scholastic philosophy
that had sought to reconcile the
apparent contradictions between
reason and faith. In common with
many thinkers of his time, he
believed there was no limit to what
science could achieve, taking it as
a matter of fact that any question
about the nature of the world could
be answered with a scientically
formulated explanation.

Hobbes theory
In Leviathan, his major political
work, Hobbes proclaims: The
universethat is, the whole mass
of things that areis corporeal,

A human
being is therefore
entirely physical.

that is to say, body. He goes on to
say that each of these bodies has
length, breadth, and depth, and
that which is not body is no part
of the universe. Although Hobbes
is stating that the nature of
everything is purely physical, he
is not claiming that because of
this physicality everything can be
perceived by us. Some bodies or
objects, Hobbes declares, are
imperceptible, even though they
occupy physical space and have
physical dimensions. These, he
calls spirits. Some of them, 

Life is but
a motion of limbs.
Thomas Hobbes

Orphaned in infancy, Thomas
Hobbes was fortunately taken
in by a wealthy uncle, who
offered him a good education.
A degree from the University
of Oxford earned him the post
of tutor to the sons of the Earl
of Devonshire. This job gave
Hobbes the opportunity to
travel widely throughout
Europe, where he met noted
scientists and thinkers, such
as the Italian astronomer
Galileo Galilei as well as the
French philosophers Marin
Mersenne, Pierre Gassendi,
and Ren Descartes.
In 1640, Hobbes ed to
France to escape the English
Civil War, staying there for
11 years. His rst book, De
Cive, was published in Paris in
1642. But it was his ideas on
morality, politics, and the
functions of society and the
state, set out in Leviathan,
that made him famous.
Also respected as a skilled
translator and mathematician,
Hobbes continued to write until
his death at the age of 91.
Key works
1642 De Cive
1651 Leviathan
1656 De Corpore
1658 De Homine

114 THOMAS HOBBES
Hobbes believed that spirits carried
information needed to function around
the body. We now know that this is done
by electrical signals, travelling along
the neurons of the nervous system.

labelled animal spirits (in line
with a common view at the time)
are responsible for most animal,
and especially human, activity.
These animal spirits move around
the body, carrying with them and
passing on information, in much
the same way as we now think of
the nervous system doing.
Sometimes, Hobbes seems to
apply his concept of physical spirits
to God and other entities found in
religion, such as angels. However,
he does state that God himself,
but not other physical spirits, should
be described as incorporeal. For
Hobbes, the divine nature of Gods
attributes is not something that
the human mind is capable of fully
understanding, therefore the term
incorporeal is the only one that
recognizes and also honors the
unknowable substance of God.
Hobbes does make clear, however,
that he believes the existence and
nature of all religious entities are
matters for faith, not science, and
that God, in particular, will remain

beyond our comprehension. All it is
possible for human beings to know
about God is that he exists, and
that he is the rst cause, or creator,
of everything in the universe.

What is consciousness?
Because Hobbes considers that
human beings are purely physical,
and are therefore no more than
biological machines, he is then
faced with the problem of how to
account for our mental nature. He
makes no attempt to give an
account of how the mind can be
explained. He simply offers a
general and rather sketchy account
of what he thought science would
eventually reveal to be the case.
Even then, he only covers the
mental activities such as voluntary
motion, appetite, and aversionall
phenomena that can be studied
and explained from a mechanistic
point of view. Hobbes has nothing
to say about what the modern-day
Australian philosopher David
Chalmers calls the hard problem of

consciousness. Chalmers points
out that certain functions of
consciousnesssuch as the use
of language and the processing
of informationcan be explained
relatively easily in terms of the
mechanisms that perform those
functions, and that physicalist
philosophers have been offering
variants of this approach for
centuries. However, the harder
problem of explaining the nature of
subjective, rst-person experience
of consciousness remains unsolved
by them. There seems to be a
built-in mismatch between the
objects of the physical sciences
on the one hand and the subjects
of conscious experience on the
othersomething that Hobbes
does not seem to be aware of.
Hobbes account of his belief
offers very little argument for his
conviction that everything in the
world, including human beings,
is wholly physical. He appears not
to notice that his grounds for the

For what is the
heart, but a spring; and
the nerves, but so many
strings; and the joints,
but so many wheels,
giving motion to the
whole body.
Thomas Hobbes

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 115
existence of imperceptible material
spirits could equally be grounds for
a belief in nonmaterial substances.
To most people, something being
imperceptible is more consistent
with a mental than with a physical
concept. In addition, because
Hobbes material spirits can only
ever possess the same properties
as other types of physical thing,
they fail to offer any assistance
toward an explanation of the
mental nature of human beings.

Descartes dualism
Hobbes also had to contend with
the very different thinking about
mind and body that Descartes set
out in his Meditations of 1641.
Descartes argues for the Real
Distinction between mind and
bodythe notion that they are
utterly distinct sorts of substance.
In objections to Descartes ideas
that he expressed at the time,
Hobbes makes no comment on this
distinction. However, 14 years later,
he addressed the problem again in
a passage in his book De Corpore,
presenting and criticizing what
seems to be a muddled form of part
of Descartes argument. Here he
rejects the conclusion Descartes
came tothat mind and body are
two distinct substanceson the
basis that Descartes use of the
phrase incorporeal substance
is an example of insignicant or
empty language. Hobbes takes it
to mean a body without body,
which appears to be nonsense.
However, this denition must be
based upon his own view that all
substances are bodies; so what
Hobbes appears to present as an
While Hobbes was formulating his
mechanistic ideas, scientists such as
the physician William Harvey were
using empirical techniques to explore
the workings of the human body.

argument for his position that
there can be no incorporeal minds,
in fact depends upon his inaccurate
assumption that the only form of
substance is body, and that there
is no possibility of incorporeal
things existing at all.

A simple prejudice
As Hobbes denition of physical
spirits indicates, it is ultimately
unclear exactly what he took
physical or corporeal to mean.
If it was meant to be simply
anything that had three spatial
dimensions, then he would be
excluding much of what we, at
the beginning of the 21st century,
might regard as being physical.
For example, his theories about the
nature of the world would rule out
the science of sub-atomic physics.
In the absence of any truly clear
notion of what his key term means,
Hobbes insistence that everything
in the world can be explained in
physical terms begins to look less
and less like a statement of scientic
principle. Instead, it starts to appear
to be merely an unscienticand

Besides sense, and
thoughts, and the train
of thoughts, the mind
of man has no
other motion.
Thomas Hobbes

unphilosophicalprejudice against
the mental. But his mechanistic
theories about the nature of our
world were very much in keeping
with the spirit of an age that was
to radically challenge most of the
prevailing views on human nature
and social order, as well as those
concerned with the substance and
workings of the universe that we
inhabit. It was this revolution in
thinking that laid the foundations
of our modern world. 

ITHEREFORE
THINK
I AM
RENE DESCARTES (15961650)

118 RENE DESCARTES
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Rationalism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
argues that whenever we
perform any action, including
thinking, we are conscious
that we perform it, and in
this way we are conscious
that we exist.
c.420 CE St. Augustine writes
in The City of God that he is
certain he exists, because if he
is mistaken, this itself proves
his existencein order to be
mistaken, one must exist.
AFTER
1781 In his Critique of Pure
Reason, Immanuel Kant argues
against Descartes, but adopts
the First CertaintyI think
therefore I existas the heart
and starting point of his
idealist philosophy.

R

en Descartes lived in the
early 17th century, during
a period sometimes called
the Scientic Revolution, an era
of rapid advances in the sciences.
The British scientist and philosopher
Francis Bacon had established a
new method for conducting scientic
experiments, based on detailed
observations and deductive
reasoning, and his methodologies
had provided a new framework for
investigating the world. Descartes
shared his excitement and optimism,
but for different reasons. Bacon
considered the practical applications
of scientic discoveries to be their
whole purpose and point, whereas
Descartes was more fascinated by
the project of extending knowledge
and understanding of the world.
During the Renaissancethe
preceding historical erapeople
had become more skeptical about
science and the possibility of
genuine knowledge in general, and
this view continued to exert an
inuence in Descartes time. So a
major motivation of his project of
pure enquiry, as his work has
become known, was the desire to
rid the sciences of the annoyance
of skepticism once and for all.

An evil demon may
be making me believe
things that are false.

I am thinking,
therefore I exist.

There is nothing
of which I can
be certain.

In the Meditations on First
Philosophy, Descartes most
accomplished and rigorous work
on metaphysics (the study of being
and reality) and epistemology (the
study of the nature and limits of
knowledge), he seeks to demonstrate
the possibility of knowledge even
from the most skeptical of positions,
and from this, to establish a rm
foundation for the sciences. The

Descartes book De Homine Figuris
takes a biological look at the causes
of knowledge. In it, he suggests that
the pineal gland is the link between
vision and conscious action.

But when I say I am;
I exist, I cannot be
wrong about this.

An evil demon could
try to make me believe this
only if I really do exist.

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 119
See also: Aristotle 5663  St. Augustine of Hippo 7273  Thomas Hobbes 11215  Blaise Pascal 12425
Benedictus Spinoza 12629  John Locke 13033  Gottfried Leibniz 13437  Immanuel Kant 16471

Meditations is written in the rstperson formI thinkbecause
he is not presenting arguments in
order to prove or disprove certain
statements, but instead wishes to
lead the reader along the path that
he himself has taken. In this way
the reader is forced to adopt the
standpoint of the meditator, thinking
things through and discovering the
truth just as Descartes had done.
This approach is reminiscent of
the Socratic method, in which the
philosopher gradually draws out a
persons understanding rather than
presenting it already packaged and
ready to take away.

knowledge. Perhaps, he says, we
are dreaming, and the apparently
real world is no more than a dream
world. He notes that this is possible,
as there are no sure signs between
being awake or asleep. But even so,
this situation would leave open the
possibility that some truths, such
as mathematical axioms, could be
known, though not through the
senses. But even these truths
might not in fact be true, because
God, who is all-powerful, could
deceive us even at this level. Even
though we believe that God is
good, it is possible that he made 

The illusory world

An optical illusion of parallel lines that are made
to look bent can fool our senses. Descartes thinks
we must accept nothing as true or given, but must
instead strip away all preconceptions before we can
proceed to a position of knowledge.

In order to establish that his beliefs
have stability and endurance, which
Descartes takes to be two important
marks of knowledge, he uses what
is known as the method of doubt.
This starts with the meditator
setting aside any belief whose truth
can be doubted, whether slightly
or completely. Descartes aim is
to show that, even if we start from
the strongest possible skeptical
position, doubting everything, we
can still reach knowledge. The
doubt is hyperbolic (exaggerated),
and used only as a philosophical
tool; as Descartes points out: no
sane person has ever seriously
doubted these things.
Descartes starts by subjecting
his beliefs to a series of increasingly
rigorous skeptical arguments,
questioning how we can be sure
of the existence of anything at all.
Could it be that the world we know
is just an illusion? We cannot trust
our senses, as we have all been
deceived by them at one time or
another, and so we cannot rely on
them as a sure footing for



It is necessary that
at least once in your life
you doubt, as far as
possible, all things.
Ren Descartes

120 RENE DESCARTES

I shall suppose that some
malicious demon of the
utmost power and cunning
has employed all his energies
in order to deceive me.
Ren Descartes

An evil demon capable of deceiving
humankind about everything cannot
make me doubt my existence; if he
tries, and I am forced to question my
own existence, this only conrms it.

us in such a way that we are prone
to errors in our reasoning. Or perhaps
there is no Godin which case we
are even more likely to be imperfect
beings (having arisen only by
chance) that are capable of being
deceived all the time.
Having reached a position in
which there seems to be nothing
at all of which he can be certain,
Descartes then devises a vivid tool
to help him to avoid slipping back
into preconceived opinion: he
supposes that there is a powerful
and evil demon who can deceive
him about anything. When he
nds himself considering a belief,

he can ask: Could the demon be
making me believe this even
though it was false? and if the
answer is yes he must set aside
the belief as open to doubt.
At this point, it seems as though
Descartes has put himself into an
impossible positionnothing
seems beyond doubt, so he has no
solid ground on which to stand.
He describes himself as feeling
helplessly tumbled around by a
whirlpool of universal doubt, unable
to nd his footing. Skepticism
seems to have made it impossible
for him even to begin his journey
back to knowledge and truth.

The First Certainty
It is at this point that Descartes
realizes that there is one belief that
he surely cannot doubt: his belief in
his own existence. Each of us can

think or say: I am, I exist, and
while we are thinking or saying it
we cannot be wrong about it. When
Descartes tries to apply the evil
demon test to this belief, he
realizes that the demon could only
make him believe that he exists if
he does in fact exist; how can he
doubt his existence unless he
exists in order to do the doubting?
This axiomI am, I exist
forms Descartes First Certainty.
In his earlier work, the Discourse
on the Method, he presented it
as: I think therefore I am, but he
abandoned this wording when
he wrote the Meditations, as the
inclusion of therefore makes the
statement read like a premise and
conclusion. Descartes wants the
readerthe meditating Ito
realize that as soon as I consider
the fact that I exist, I know it to be
true. This truth is instantly grasped.
The realization that I exist is a
direct intuition, not the conclusion
of an argument.
Despite Descartes move to a
clearer expression of his position,
the earlier formulation was so
catchy that it stuck in peoples
minds, and to this day the First
Certainty is generally known as
the cogito, from the Latin cogito

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 121

ergo sum, meaning I think
therefore I am. St. Augustine of
Hippo had used a very similar
argument in The City of God, when
he said: For if I am mistaken, I
exist; meaning that if he did not
exist, he could not be mistaken.
Augustine, however, made little
use of this in his thinking, and
certainly did not reach it in the
way that Descartes did.

Descartes realizes that we might
also be able to gain knowledge
from the certainty itself. This is
because the knowledge that I am
thinking is bound up with the
knowledge of my existence. So
thinking is also something that
I cannot rationally doubt, for
doubting is a kind of thinking, so
to doubt that I am thinking is to
be thinking. As Descartes now
knows that he exists and that he
is thinking, then heand every
other meditatoralso knows
that he is a thinking thing.
Descartes makes clear, though,
that this is as far as he can reason
from the First Certainty. He is
certainly not entitled to say that he
is only a thinking thinga mind
as he has no way of knowing what
more he might be. He might be a
physical thing that also has the
ability to think, or he might be
something else, something that he
has not even conceived yet. The
point is that at this stage of his
meditations he knows only that 

What is this I?
Despite the fact that the First
Certaintys main function is to
provide a rm footing for knowledge,

The only question that Descartes is denitely
able to answer using his method of doubt is whether
he is thinking. He cannot prove the existence of his
body or of the external world.

I
DO

H AVE A BO

IS THERE AN OUTSIDE WORLD?

DY

?

AM

This proposition, I am,
I exist, is necessarily true
whenever it is put forward
by me or conceived
in my mind.
Ren Descartes

What use, though, is a single belief?
The simplest logical argument is a
syllogism, which has two premises
and a conclusionsuch as: all
birds have wings; a robin is a bird;
therefore all robins have wings. We
surely cannot get anywhere from
the starting point of just one true
belief. But Descartes was not
looking to reach these kinds of
conclusions from his First Certainty.
As he explained: Archimedes
used to demand just one rm and
immovable point in order to shift
the entire Earth. For Descartes, the
certainty of his own existence gives
him the equivalent; it saves him
from that whirlpool of doubt, gives
him a rm foothold, and so allows
him to start on the journey back from
skepticism to knowledge. It is crucial
to his project of enquiry, but it is not
the foundation of his epistemology.

IT

HI N

KI N G ?

122 RENE DESCARTES

When someone says
I am thinking, therefore
I am, he recognizes
it as something self-evident
by a simple intuition
of the mind.
Ren Descartes

he is a thinking thing; as he puts
it, he knows only that he is, in
the strict sense only a thinking
thing. Later, in the sixth book of the
Meditations, Descartes presents an
argument that mind and body are
different sorts of thingthat they
are distinct substancesbut he is
not yet in a position to do so.

Doubting Descartes
This First Certainty has been the
target of criticism from many
writers who hold that Descartes
approach to skepticism is doomed

Ren Descartes

from the start. One of the main
arguments against it takes issue
with the very use of the term I in
I am, I exist. Although Descartes
cannot be wrong in saying that
thinking is occurring, how does he
know that there is a thinkera
single, unied consciousness doing
that thinking? What gives him the
right to assert the existence of
anything beyond the thoughts? On
the other hand, can we make sense
of the notion of thoughts oating
around without a thinker?
It is difcult to imagine detached,
coherent thoughts, and Descartes
argues that it is impossible to
conceive of such a state of affairs.
However, if one were to disagree,
and believe that a world of thoughts
with no thinkers is genuinely
possible, Descartes would not be
entitled to the belief that he exists,
and would thus fail to reach his
First Certainty. The existence of
thoughts would not give him the
solid ground he needed.
The problem with this notion
of thoughts oating around with
no thinker is that reasoning would
be impossible. In order to reason,
it is necessary to relate ideas in
a particular way. For example, if

Patrick has the thought all men
are mortal and Patricia has the
thought Socrates is a man,
neither can conclude anything.
But if Paula has both thoughts, she
can conclude that Socrates is
mortal. Merely having the thoughts
all men are mortal and Socrates
is a man oating around is like
two separate people having them;
in order for reason to be possible
we need to make these thoughts
relative to one another, to link them
in the right way. It turns out that
making thoughts relative to
anything other than a thinker
(for example, to a place or to a
time) fails to do the job. And since
reasoning is possible, Descartes
can conclude that there is a thinker.
Some modern philosophers have
denied that Descartes certainty of
his own existence can do the job he
requires of it; they argue that I
exist has no content, as it merely
refers to its subject but says nothing
meaningful or important about it;
it is simply pointing at the subject.
For this reason nothing can follow
from it, and Descartes project fails
at the beginning. This seems to
miss Descartes point; as we have
seen, he does not use the First

Ren Descartes was born near
Tours, France, and was educated
at the Jesuit Collge Royale, in
La Flche. Due to ill-health, he was
allowed to stay in bed until late in
the mornings, and he formed the
habit of meditating. From the age
of 16 he concentrated on studying
mathematics, breaking off his
studies for four years to volunteer
as a soldier in Europes Thirty
Years War. During this time he
found his philosophical calling,
and after leaving the army, he
settled rst in Paris and then in
the Netherlands, where he spent
most of the rest of his life. In 1649

he was invited to Sweden by
Queen Christina to discuss
philosophy; he was expected to
get up very early, much against
his normal practice. He believed
that this new regimeand the
Swedish climatecaused him
to contract pneumonia, of which
he died a year later.
Key works
1637 Discourse on the Method
1641 Meditations on First
Philosophy
1644 Principles of Philosophy
1662 De Homine Fuguris

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 123
Certainty as a premise from which
to derive further knowledgeall
he needs is that there be a self for
him to point to. So even if I exist
only succeeds in pointing to the
meditator, then he has an escape
from the whirlpool of doubt.

An unreal thinker
For those who have misunderstood
Descartes to have been offering
an argument from the fact of his
thinking to the fact of his existence,
we can point out that the First
Certainty is a direct intuition, not
a logical argument. Why, though,
would it be a problem if Descartes
had been offering an argument?
As it stands, the apparent
inference I am thinking, therefore I
exist is missing a major premise;
that is, in order for the argument to
work it needs another premise,
such as anything that is thinking
exists. Sometimes an obvious
premise is not actually stated in an
argument, in which case it is
known as a suppressed premise.
But some of Descartes critics
complain that this suppressed
premise is not at all obvious. For
example, Hamlet, in Shakespeares
play, thought a great deal, but it is

We ought to enquire
as to what sort of
knowledge human reason
is capable of attaining,
before we set about
acquiring knowledge
of things in particular.
Ren Descartes

also clearly true that he did not
exist; so it is not true that anything
that thinks exists.
We might say that in so far as
Hamlet thought, he thought in the
ctional world of a play, but he also
existed in that ctional world; in so
far as he did not exist, he did not
exist in the real world. His reality
and thinking are linked to the same
world. But Descartes critics might
respond that that is precisely the
point: knowing that someone called
Hamlet was thinkingand no more
than thisdoes not assure us that
this person exists in the real world;
for that, we should have to know
that he was thinking in the real
world. Knowing that something or
someonelike Descartesis
thinking, is not enough to prove
their reality in this world.
The answer to this dilemma lies
in the rst-person nature of the
Meditations, and the reasons for
Descartes use of the I throughout
now becomes clear. Because while
I might be unsure whether Hamlet
was thinking, and therefore existed,
in a ctional world or the real world,
I cannot be unsure about myself.

and to establish a rm, rational
foundation for knowledge. He is
also well known for proposing that
the mind and the body are two
distinct substancesone material
(the body) and the other immaterial
(the mind)which are nonetheless
capable of interaction. This famous
distinction, which he explains in
the Sixth Meditation, became
known as Cartesian dualism.
However, it is the rigor of
Descartes thought and his rejection
of any reliance on authority that are
perhaps his most important legacy.
The centuries after his death were
dominated by philosophers who
either developed his ideas or those
who took as their main task the
refutation of his thoughts, such as
Thomas Hobbes, Benedictus
Spinoza, and Gottfried Leibniz. 

Modern philosophy
In the Preface to the Reader of the
Meditations, Descartes accurately
predicted that many readers would
approach his work in such a way
that most would not bother to grasp
the proper order of my arguments
and the connection between them,
but merely try to carp at individual
sentences, as is the fashion. On
the other hand, he also wrote that
I do not expect any popular approval,
or indeed any wide audience, and
in this he was much mistaken. He
is often described as the father of
modern philosophy. He sought to
give philosophy the certainty of
mathematics without recourse to
any kind of dogma or authority,

The separation of mind and body
theorized by Descartes leaves open the
following question: since all we can see
of ourselves is our bodies, how could
we prove that a robot is not conscious?

124

IMAGINATION
DECIDES
EVERYTHING
BLAISE PASCAL (16231662)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of mind

Imagination is a
powerful force in
human beings.

APPROACH
Voluntarism
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Aristotle says that
imagination is the process by
which we say that an image
is presented to us, and that
the soul never thinks without
a mental image.
1641 Ren Descartes claims
that the philosopher must
train his imagination for the
sake of gaining knowledge.
AFTER
1740 In his Treatise of Human
Nature, David Hume argues
that nothing we imagine is
absolutely impossible.
1787 Immanuel Kant claims
that we synthesize the
incoherent messages from
our senses into images, and
then into concepts, using
the imagination.

It can override our reason.

But it can lead either to
truths or falsehoods.

We may see beauty, justice, or
happiness where it does not
really exist.

Imagination leads
us astray.

P

ascals best-known book,
Penses, is not primarily a
philosophical work. Rather,
it is a compilation of fragments from
his notes for a projected book on
Christian theology. His ideas were
aimed primarily at what he called
libertinsex-Catholics who had
left religion as a result of the sort
of free thinking encouraged by
skeptical writers such as Montaigne.
In one of the longer fragments,
Pascal discusses imagination. He
offers little or no argument for his
claims, being concerned merely to
set down his thoughts on the matter.
Pascals point is that imagination
is the most powerful force in human
beings, and one of our chief sources
of error. Imagination, he says,
causes us to trust people despite
what reason tells us. For example,
because lawyers and doctors dress
up in special clothes, we tend to
trust them more. Conversely, we
pay less attention to someone who
looks shabby or odd, even if he is
talking good sense.
What makes things worse is that,
though it usually leads to falsehood,
imagination occasionally leads to
truth; if it were always false, then we
could use it as a source of certainty
by simply accepting its negation.

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 125
See also: Aristotle 5663
Immanuel Kant 16471



Michel de Montaigne 10809

After presenting the case against
imagination in some detail, Pascal
suddenly ends his discussion of it
by writing: Imagination decides
everything: it produces beauty,
justice, and happiness, which is the
greatest thing in the world. Out of
context, it might seem that he is
praising imagination, but we can
see from what preceded this
passage that his intention is very
different. As imagination usually
leads to error, then the beauty,
justice, and happiness that it
produces will usually be false.

Man is but a reed,
the weakest nature;
yet he is a thinking reed.
Blaise Pascal

Blaise Pascal



Ren Descartes 11623



David Hume 14853



In the wider context of a work of
Christian theology, and especially
in light of Pascals emphasis on the
use of reason to bring people to
religious belief, we can see that his
aim is to show the libertins that
the life of pleasure that they have
chosen is not what they think it is.
Although they believe that they
have chosen the path of reason,
they have in fact been misled by
the power of the imagination.

Pascals Wager
This view is relevant to one of the
most complete notes in the Penses,
the famous argument known as
Pascals Wager. The wager was
designed to give the libertins a
reason to return to the Church, and
it is a good example of voluntarism,
the idea that belief is a matter of
decision. Pascal accepts that it is
not possible to give good rational
grounds for religious belief, but
tries to offer rational grounds for
wanting to have such beliefs.
These consist of weighing up
the possible prot and loss of
making a bet on the existence
Blaise Pascal was born in ClermontFerrand, France. He was the son
of a government functionary who
had a keen interest in science and
mathematics and who educated
Pascal and his two sisters. Pascal
published his rst mathematical
paper at the age of 16, and had
invented the rst digital calculator
by the time he was 18. He also
corresponded with the famous
mathematician Pierre Fermat, with
whom he laid the foundations of
probability theory.
Pascal underwent two religious
conversions, rst to Jansenism
(an approach to Christian teaching

According to Pascal, we are
constantly tricked by the imagination
into making the wrong judgments
including judgements about people
based on how they are dressed.

of God. Pascal argues that betting
that God does not exist risks losing
a great deal (innite happiness in
Heaven), while only gaining a little
(a nite sense of independence in
this world)but betting that God
exists risks little while gaining a
great deal. It is more rational, on
this basis, to believe in God. 
that was later declared heretical),
and then to Christianity proper.
This led him to abandon his
mathematical and scientic
work in favor of religious
writings, including the Penses.
In 166062 he instituted the
worlds rst public transport
service, giving all prots to the
poor, despite suffering from
severe ill health from the 1650s
until his death in 1662.
Key works
1657 Lettres Provinciales
1670 Penses

126

GOD IS THE CAUSE
OF ALL THINGS,
WHICH ARE IN HIM
BENEDICTUS SPINOZA (16321677)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Substance monism
BEFORE
c.1190 Jewish philosopher
Moses Maimonides invents
a demythologized version
of religion which later
inspires Spinoza.
16th century Italian scientist
Giordano Bruno develops a
form of pantheism.
1640 Ren Descartes publishes
his Meditations, another of
Spinozas inuences.
AFTER
Late 20th century
Philosophers Stuart Hampshire,
Donald Davidson, and Thomas
Nagel all develop approaches
to the philosophy of mind that
have similarities to Spinozas
monist thought.

L

ike most philosophies of the
17th century, Spinozas
philosophical system has the
notion of substance at its heart.
This concept can be traced back to
Aristotle, who asked What is it
about an object that stays the same
when it undergoes change? Wax,
for example, can melt and change
its shape, size, color, smell, and
texture, and yet still remain wax,
prompting the question: what are
we referring to when we speak of
the wax? Since it can change in
every way that we can perceive, the
wax must also be something beyond
its perceptible properties, and for
Aristotle this unchanging thing is
the waxs substance. More

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 127
See also: Aristotle 5663



Moses Maimonides 8485



Ren Descartes 11623



Donald Davidson 338

Everything that
exists is made of this
one substance.

There is only
one substance.

This substance is
God or nature.

It provides everything
in our universe with its

...process of
formation,

... its purpose,

... its shape,

... and its matter.

In these four ways, God
causes everything.

generally, substance is anything
that has propertiesor that which
underlies the world of appearance.
Spinoza employs substance in a
similar way, dening it as that which
is self-explanatoryor that which
can be understood by knowing its
nature alone, as opposed to all other
things that can be known only by
their relationships with other things.
For example, the concept cart can
only be understood with reference
to other concepts, such as motion,
transport, and so on. Moreover, for
Spinoza, there can only be one such
substance, for if there were two,
understanding one would entail
understanding its relationship with
the other, which contradicts the

denition of substance. Furthermore,
he argues, since there is only one
such substance, there can, in fact,
be nothing but that substance, and
everything else is in some sense a
part of it. Spinozas position is
known as substance monism,
which claims that all things are
ultimately aspects of a single thing,
as opposed to substance dualism,
which claims that there are
ultimately two kinds of things in
the universe, most commonly
dened as mind and matter.

Substance as God or nature
For Spinoza, then, substance
underlies our experience, but it
can also be known by its various

attributes. He does not specify
how many attributes substance
has, but he says that human
beings, at least, can conceive of
twonamely, the attribute of
extension (physicality) and the
attribute of thought (mentality). For
this reason, Spinoza is also known
as an attribute dualist, and he
claims that these two attributes
cannot be explained by each other,
and so must be included in any
complete account of the world. As
for substance itself, Spinoza says
that we are right to call it God or
nature (Deus sive natura)that
self-explaining thing which, in
human form, sees itself under the
attributes of body and mind. 

128 BENEDICTUS SPINOZA

All changes, from a change of mood
to a change in a candles shape, are,
for Spinoza, alterations that occur to
a single substance that has both
mental and physical attributes.

At the level of individual things,
including human beings, Spinozas
attribute dualism is intended in
part to deal with the question of
how minds and bodies interact.
The things that we experience as
individual bodies or minds are in
fact modications of the single
substance as conceived under
one of the attributes. Each
modication is both a physical
thing (in so far as it is conceived
under the attribute of extension)

Benedictus Spinoza

and a mental thing (in so far as it
is conceived under the attribute
of thought). In particular, a human
mind is a modication of substance
conceived under the attribute of
thought, and the human brain is
the same modication of substance
conceived under the attribute of
extension. In this way, Spinoza
avoids any question about the
interaction between mind and
body: there is no interaction, only
a one-to-one correspondence.
However, Spinozas theory
commits him to the view that it is
not only human beings that are
minds as well as bodies, but
everything else too. Tables, rocks,
treesall of these are modications
of the one substance under the
attributes of thought and extension.
So, they are all both physical and
mental things, although their
mentality is very simple and they
are not what we should call minds.
This aspect of Spinozas theory is
difcult for many people either to
accept or to understand.

The world is God
Spinozas theory, which he explains
fully in Ethics, is often referred to
as a form of pantheismthe belief
Benedictus (or Baruch) Spinoza
was born in Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, in 1632. At the age
of 23 he was excommunicated
by the synagogue of Portuguese
Jews in Amsterdam, who probably
wished to distance themselves
from Spinozas teachings. Spinozas
Theological-Political Treatise
was later attacked by Christian
theologians and banned in
1674a fate that had already
befallen the work of the French
philosopher Ren Descartes. The
furore caused him to withhold
publication of his greatest work,
the Ethics, until after his death.

Mind and body
are one.
Benedictus Spinoza

that God is the world, and that the
world is God. Pantheism is often
criticized by theists (people who
believe in God), who argue that
it is little more than atheism by
another name. However, Spinozas
theory is in fact much closer to
panentheismthe view that the
world is God, but that God is more
than the world. For in Spinozas
system, the world is not a mass of
material and mental stuffrather,
the world of material things is a
form of God as conceived under
the attribute of extension, and the
world of mental things is that same
form of God as conceived under the
attribute of thought. Therefore the
Spinoza was a modest, intensely
moral man who turned down
numerous lucrative teaching
positions for the sake of his
intellectual freedom. Instead
he lived a frugal life in various
places in the Netherlands,
making a living by private
philosophy teaching and as
a lens grinder. He died from
tuberculosis in 1677.
Key works
1670 Theological-Political
Treatise
1677 Ethics

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 129

The human mind
is part of the innite
intellect of God.
Benedictus Spinoza

According to Spinoza, all objects, whether animal,
vegetable, or mineral, have a mentality. Both their
bodies and their mentalities are a part of God,
who is greater than all the worlds physical and
mental attributes. God, for Spinoza, is the
substance that underlies reality.

Every object in
the universe, even
a rock, has a body
and a mind.

one substance or God is more than
the world, but the world itself is
entirely substance or God.
However, Spinozas God is clearly
different from the God of standard
Judaeo-Christian theology. Not
only is it not a person, it cannot be
regarded as being the creator of
the world in the sense found in the
Book of Genesis. Spinozas God
does not exist alone before creation,
and then bring it into existence.

Body and mind
are attributes of
substance.

Substance is God,
in whom all is
explained.

God as the cause
What can Spinoza mean, then,
when he says that God is the cause
of everything? The one substance
is God or natureso even if
there is more to God than those
modications of substance that
make up our world, how can the
relationship between God and
nature be causal?
First, we should note that
Spinoza, in common with most
philosophers before him, uses
the word cause in a much richer
sense than we do nowa sense
that originates in Aristotles
denition of four types of cause.
These are (using a statue as an
example): a formal cause, or the
relationship between a things
parts (its shape or form); a material
cause, or the matter a thing is made
of (the bronze, marble, and so on);

an efcient cause, or that which
brings a thing into being (the
sculpting process); and a nal cause,
or the purpose for which a thing
exists (the creation of a work of art,
the desire for money, and so on).
For Aristotle and Spinoza,
these together dene cause, and
provide a complete explanation of a
thingunlike todays usage, which
tends to relate to the efcient
or nal causes only. Therefore,
when Spinoza speaks of God or
substance being self-caused he
means that it is self-explanatory,
rather than that it is simply selfgenerating. When he talks of God

being the cause of all things, he
means that all things nd their
explanation in God.
God, therefore, is not what
Spinoza calls a transitive cause of
the worldsomething external that
brings the world into being. Rather,
God is the immanent cause of the
world. This means that God is in
the world, that the world is in God,
and that the existence and essence
of the world are explained by Gods
existence and essence. For Spinoza,
to fully appreciate this fact is to
attain the highest state of freedom
and salvation possiblea state
he calls blessedness. 

130

NO MANS
KNOWLEDGE HERE
CAN GO BEYOND
HIS EXPERIENCE
JOHN LOCKE (16321704)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Empiricism
BEFORE
c.380 BCE In his dialogue,
Meno, Plato argues that we
remember knowledge from
previous lives.
Mid-13th century Thomas
Aquinas puts forward the
principle that whatever is
in our intellect must have
previously been in the senses.
AFTER
Late 17th century Gottfried
Leibniz argues that the mind
may seem to be a tabula rasa
at birth, but contains innate,
underlying knowledge, which
experience gradually uncovers.
1966 Noam Chomsky, in
Cartesian Linguistics, sets out
his theory of innate grammar.

J

ohn Locke is traditionally
included in the group of
philosophers known as the
British Empiricists, together with
two later philosophers, George
Berkeley and David Hume. The
empiricists are generally thought
to hold the view that all human
knowledge must come directly or
indirectly from the experience of
the world that we acquire through
the use of our senses alone. This
contrasts with the thinking of the
rationalist philosophers, such
as Ren Descartes, Benedictus
Spinoza, and Gottfried Leibniz,
who hold that in principle, at least,
it is possible to acquire knowledge
solely through the use of reason.

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 131
See also: Plato 5055  Thomas Aquinas 8895  Ren Descartes 11623
Gottfried Leibniz 13437  George Berkeley 13841  David Hume 14853




Benedictus Spinoza 12629
Noam Chomsky 30405



Rationalists believe that we are
born with some ideas and concepts;
that they are innate.

But this is not borne
out by the fact that...

...there are no truths
that are found in
everyone at birth.

...there are no universal
ideas found in people of
all cultures at all times.

Everything we
know is gained from
experience.

In fact, the division between these
two groups is not as clear-cut as
is often assumed. The rationalists
all accept that in practice our
knowledge of the world ultimately
stems from our experience, and
most notably from scientic enquiry.
Locke reaches his distinctive views
concerning the nature of the world
by applying a process of reasoning
later known as abduction (inference
to the best explanation from the
available evidence) to the facts of
sensory experience. For example,
Locke sets out to demonstrate that
the best explanation of the world
as we experience it is corpuscular
theory. This is the theory that
everything in the world is made

up of submicroscopic particles, or
corpuscles, which we can have no
direct knowledge of, but which, by
their very existence, make sense of
phenomena that would otherwise
be difcult or impossible to explain.
Corpuscular theory was becoming
popular in 17th-century scientic
thinking and is fundamental to
Lockes view of the physical world.

Innate ideas
The claim that mans knowledge
cannot go beyond his experience
may therefore seem inappropriate,
or at least an exaggeration, when
attributed to Locke. However,
Locke does argue at some length,
in his Essay Concerning Human

If we attentively consider
newborn children, we
shall have little reason
to think that they bring
many ideas into
the world with them.
John Locke

Understanding, against the theory
proposed by the rationalists to
explain how knowledge could be
accessed without experience. This
is the theory of innate ideas.
The concept that human beings
are born with innate ideas, and that
these can give us knowledge about
the nature of the world around us,
independently of anything we may
experience, dates back to the dawn
of philosophy. Plato had developed
a concept, according to which all
genuine knowledge is essentially
located within us, but that when
we die our souls are reincarnated
into new bodies and the shock of
birth causes us to forget it all.
Education is therefore not about
learning new facts, but about
unforgetting, and the educator
is not a teacher but a midwife.
However, many later thinkers
countered Platos theory, proposing
that all knowledge cannot be innate
and that only a limited number of
concepts can be. These include the
concept of God and also that of a
perfect geometric structure, such
as an equilateral triangle. This 

132 JOHN LOCKE
type of knowledge, in their view,
can be gained without any direct
sensory experience, in the way
that it is possible to devise a
mathematical formula by using
nothing more than the powers of
reason and logic. Ren Descartes,
for example, declares that although
he believes that we all have an idea
of God imprinted in uslike the
mark that a craftsman makes in
the clay of a potthis knowledge
of Gods existence can only be
brought into our conscious mind
through a process of reasoning.

Lockes objections
Locke was against the idea that
human beings possess any kind
of innate knowledge. He takes
the view that the mind at birth
is a tabula rasaa blank tablet or
a new sheet of paper upon which
experience writes, in the same
way that light can create images
on photographic lm. According
to Locke, we bring nothing to the
process except the basic human
ability to apply reason to the
information that we gather through

our senses. He argues that there is
not the slightest empirical evidence
to suggest that the minds of infants
are other than blank at birth, and
adds that this is also true of the
minds of the mentally decient,
stating that they have not the least
apprehension or thought of them.
Locke, therefore, declares that any
doctrine supporting the existence
of innate ideas must be false.
Locke also goes on to attack
the very notion of innate ideas by
arguing that it is incoherent. In
order for something to be an idea
at all, he states that it has to have
been present at some point in
somebodys mind. But, as Locke
points out, any idea that claims
to be truly innate must also be
claiming to precede any form of
human experience. Locke accepts
that it is true, as Gottfried Leibniz
states, that an idea may exist so
deep in a persons memory that
for a time it is difcult or even
impossible to recall, and so is not
accessible to the conscious mind.
Innate ideas, on the other hand,
are believed to somehow exist

Locke believed the human mind is
like a blank canvas, or tabula rasa, at
birth. He states that all our knowledge
of the world can only come from our
experience, conveyed to us by our
senses. We can then rationalize this
knowledge to formulate new ideas.

Experience

Tabula Rasa

Theory

It seems to me a
near contradiction to
say that there are truths
imprinted on the soul,
which it perceives or
understands not.
John Locke

somewhere, before the presence
of any sort of mechanism that is
capable of conceiving them and
bringing them into consciousness.
The supporters of the existence
of innate ideas often also argue
that as such ideas are present in
all human beings at birth, they
must be by nature universal,
which means that they are found
in all human societies at all points
in history. Plato, for example,
claims that everyone potentially
has access to the same basic
body of knowledge, denying any
difference in that respect between
men and women, or between
slaves and freemen. Similarly,
in Lockes time, the theory was
frequently put forward that because
innate ideas can only be placed in
us by God, they must be universal,
as God is not capable of being so
unfair as to hand them out only
to a select group of people.
Locke counters the argument
for universal ideas by once again
bringing to our attention that a
simple examination of the world
around us will readily show that
they do no exist. Even if there
were concepts, or ideas, which
absolutely every human being in

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 133

Let us then suppose
the mind to be white
paper, void of all
characters, without any
ideas; how comes it
to be furnished?
John Locke

the world held in common, Locke
argues that we would have no rm
grounds for concluding that they
were also innate. He declares that
it would always be possible to
discover other explanations for
their universality, such as the fact
that they stem from the most basic
ways in which a human being
experiences the world around him,
which is something that we all
must share.
In 1704, Gottfried Leibniz wrote
a rebuttal of Lockes empiricist
arguments in his New Essays on

John Locke

the Human Understanding. Leibniz
declares that innate ideas are the
one clear way that we can gain
knowledge that is not based upon
sensory experience, and that Locke
is wrong to deny their possibility.
The debate about whether human
beings can know anything beyond
what they perceive through their
ve basic senses continues.

Language as innate
Although Locke may reject the
doctrine of innate ideas, he does
not reject the concept that human
beings have innate capacities.
Indeed, the possession of capacities
such as perception and reasoning
are central to his accounts of the
mechanism of human knowledge
and understanding. In the late
20th century, the American
philosophy Noam Chomsky took
this idea further when he put
forward his theory that there is an
innate process of thinking in every
human mind, which is capable
of generating a universal deep
structure of language. Chomsky
believes that regardless of their
apparent structural differences,
all human languages have been
generated from this common basis.

As the mind is a blank canvas, or
tabula rasa, at birth, Locke believes
that anybody can be transformed by
a good education, one that encourages
rational thought and individual talents.

John Locke was born in 1632, the
son of an English country lawyer.
Thanks to wealthy patrons, he
received a good education, rst
at Westminster School in London,
then at Oxford. He was impressed
with the empirical approach to
science adopted by the pioneering
chemist Robert Boyle, and he
both promoted Boyles ideas and
assisted in his experimental work.
Though Lockes empiricist ideas
are important, it was his political
writing that made him famous. He
proposed a social-contract theory of
the legitimacy of government and
the idea of natural rights to private

property. Locke ed England
twice, as a political exile, but
returned in 1688, after the
accession to the throne of
William and Mary. He remained
in England, writing as well as
holding various government
positions, until his death in 1704.

Locke played an important role in
questioning how human beings
acquire knowledge, at a time when
mans understanding of the world
was expanding at an unprecedented
rate. Earlier philosophersnotably
the medieval Scholastic thinkers
such as Thomas Aquinashad
concluded that some aspects of
reality were beyond the grasp of
the human mind. But Locke took
this a stage further. By detailed
analysis of mans mental faculties,
he sought to set down the exact
limits of what is knowable. 

Key works
1689 A Letter Concerning
Toleration
1690 An Essay Concerning
Human Understanding
1690 Two Treatises of
Government

134

THERE ARE TWO
KINDS OF TRUTHS:
TRUTHS OF
REASONING AND
TRUTHS OF FACT
GOTTFRIED LEIBNIZ (16461716)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Rationalism
BEFORE
1340 Nicolaus of Autrecourt
argues that there are no
necessary truths about the
world, only contingent truths.
1600s Ren Descartes claims
that ideas come to us in three
ways; they can be derived from
experience, drawn from reason,
or known innately (being
created in the mind by God).
AFTER
1748 David Hume explores the
distinction between necessary
and contingent truths.
1927 Alfred North Whitehead
postulates actual entities,
similar to Leibnizs monads,
which reect the whole
universe in themselves.

E

arly modern philosophy
is often presented as being
divided into two schools
that of the rationalists (including
Ren Descartes, Benedictus
Spinoza, and Immanuel Kant) and
that of the empiricists (including
John Locke, George Berkeley, and
David Hume). In fact, the various
philosophers did not easily fall into
two clear groups, each being like
and unlike each of the others in
complex and overlapping ways.
The essential difference between
the two schools, however, was
epistemologicalthat is, they
differed in their opinions about
what we can know, and how we
know what we know. Put simply,

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 135
See also: Nicolaus of Autrecourt 334  Ren Descartes 11623  David Hume
14853  Immanuel Kant 16471  Alfred North Whitehead 336

Every thing in the world
has a distinct notion.

This notion contains every
truth about that thing,
including its connections
to other things.

We can analyze these
connections through
rational reection.

When the analysis is
nite, we can reach
the nal truth.

When the analysis is
innite, we cannot reach the
nal truth through reasoning
only through experience.

These are truths
of reasoning.

These are truths
of fact.

the empiricists held that knowledge
is derived from experience, while
the rationalists claimed that
knowledge can be gained through
rational reection alone.
Leibniz was a rationalist, and
his distinction between truths
of reasoning and truths of fact
marks an interesting twist in the
debate between rationalism and
empiricism. His claim, which he
makes in most famous work, the
Monadology, is that in principle
all knowledge can be accessed by
rational reection. However, due
to shortcomings in our rational 

We know hardly anything
adequately, few things
a priori, and most things
through experience.
Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz

Gottfried Leibniz
Gottfried Leibniz was a
German philosopher and
mathematician. He was born
in Leipzig, and after university
he took public service with
the Elector of Mainz for ve
years, during which time he
concentrated mainly on
political writings. After a
period spent travelling, he
took up the post of librarian
to the Duke of Brunswick, in
Hanover, and remained there
until his death. It was during
this last period of his life that
he did most of the work on
the development of his unique
philosophical system.
Leibniz is famous in
mathematics for his invention
of the so-called innitesimal
calculus and the argument
that followed this, as both
Leibniz and Newton claimed
the discovery as their own. It
seems clear that they had in
fact reached it independently,
but Leibniz developed a much
more usable notation which
is still used today.
Key works
1673 A Philosophers Creed
1685 Discourse on Metaphysics
1695 The New System
1710 Theodicy
1714 Monadology

136 GOTTFRIED LEIBNIZ
A map of the internet shows the
innumerable connections between
internet users. Leibnizs theory of
monads suggests that all our minds
are similarly connected.

faculties, human beings must
also rely on experience as a
means of acquiring knowledge.

A universe in our minds
To see how Leibniz arrives at this
conclusion, we need to understand
a little of his metaphysicshis
view of how the universe is
constructed. He holds that every
part of the world, every individual
thing, has a distinct concept or
notion associated with it, and that
every such notion contains within
it everything that is true about
itself, including its relations to other
things. Because everything in the
universe is connected, he argues,
it follows that every notion is
connected to every other notion,
and so it is possibleat least
in principleto follow these
connections and to discover truths
about the entire universe through

rational reection alone. Such
reection leads to Leibnizs truths
of reasoning. However, the human
mind can grasp only a small number
of such truths (such as those of
mathematics), and so it has to
rely on experience, which yields
truths of fact.
So how is it possible to progress
from knowing that it is snowing,
for example, to knowing what will
happen tomorrow somewhere on the
other side of the world? For Leibniz,
the answer lies in the fact that the
universe is composed of individual,
simple substances called monads.
Each monad is isolated from other
monads, and each contains a
complete representation of the
whole universe in its past,
present, and future states. This
representation is synchronized
between all the monads, so that
each one has the same content.

According to Leibniz, this is how
God created thingsin a state of
pre-established harmony.
Leibniz claims that every
human mind is a monad, and so
contains a complete representation
of the universe. It is therefore
possible in principle for us to learn
everything that there is to know
about our world and beyond simply
by exploring our own minds.
Simply by analyzing my notion of
the star Betelgeuse, for example, I
will eventually be able to determine
the temperature on the surface
of the actual star Betelgeuse.
However, in practice, the analysis
that is required for me reach this
information is impossibly
complexLeibniz calls it innite
and because I cannot complete
it, the only way that I can discover
the temperature of Betelgeuse is by
measuring it empirically using
astronomical equipment.
Is the temperature of the surface
of Betelgeuse a truth of reasoning
or a truth of fact? It may be true
that I had to resort to empirical

Each singular substance
expresses the whole
universe in its own way.
Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 137
methods to discover the answer,
but had my rational faculties been
better I could also have discovered it
through rational reection. Whether
it is a truth of reasoning or a truth
of fact, therefore, seems to depend
on how I arrive at the answerbut
is this what Leibniz is claiming?

Necessary truths
The trouble for Leibniz is that he
holds that truths of reasoning are
necessary, meaning that it is
impossible to contradict them,
while truths of fact are contingent;
they can be denied without logical
contradiction. A mathematical
truth is a necessary truth, because
denying its conclusions contradicts
the meanings of its own terms.
But the proposition it is raining
in Spain is contingent, because
denying it does not involve a
contradiction in termsalthough
it may still be factually incorrect.
Leibnizs distinction between
truths of reasoning and truths of
fact is not simply an epistemological
one (about the limits of knowledge),
but also a metaphysical one (about
the nature of the world), and it is
not clear that his arguments
support his metaphysical claim.
Leibnizs theory of monads seems
to suggest that all truths are truths

of reasoning, which we would have
access to if we could nish our
rational analysis. But as a truth of
reasoning is a necessary truth, in
what way is it impossible for the
temperature on Betelgeuse to be
2,401 Kelvin rather than 2,400
Kelvin? Certainly not impossible
in the sense that the proposition
2 + 2 = 5 is impossible, for the latter
is simply a logical contradiction.
Likewise, if we follow Leibniz
and separate neccesary and
contingent truths, we end up with
the following problem: I can
discover Pythagorass theorem
simply by reecting on the idea of
triangles, so Pythagorass theorem
must be a truth of reasoning. But
Betelgeuses temperature and
Pythagorass theorem are both just
as true, and just as much part of
the monad that is my mindso
why should one be considered
contingent and the other necessary?
Moreover, Leibniz tells us that
whereas no-one can reach the end of
an innite analysis, God can grasp
the whole universe at once, and so
for him all truths are neccessary
truths. The difference between a
truth of reasoning and a truth of fact,
therefore, does seem to be a matter
of how one comes to know itand
in that case it is difcult to see why
the former should always be seen
to be necessarily true, while the
latter may or may not be true.

An uncertain future

God understands
everything through eternal
truth, since he does not
need experience.
Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz

In setting out a scheme in which an
omnipotent, omniscient God creates
the universe, Leibniz inevitably
faces the problem of accounting for
the notion of freedom of will. How
can I choose to act in a certain way
if God already knows how I am
going to act? But the problem runs
deeperthere seems to be no room
for genuine contingency at all.
Leibnizs theory only allows for a

The mechanical calculator was
one of Leibnizs many inventions. Its
creation is a testament to his interest
in mathematics and logicelds in
which he was a great innovator.

distinction between truths whose
necessity we can discover, and
truths whose necessity only God
can see. We know (if we accept
Leibnizs theory) that the future of
the world is set by an omniscient
and benevolent god, who therefore
has created the best of all possible
worlds. But we call the future
contingent, or undetermined,
because as limited human beings
we cannot see its content.

Leibnizs legacy
In spite of the difculties inherent
in Leibnizs theory, his ideas went
on to shape the work of numerous
philosophers, including David Hume
and Immanuel Kant. Kant rened
Leibnizs truths of reasoning and
truths of fact into the distinction
between analytic and synthetic
statementsa division that has
remained central to European
philosophy ever since.
Liebnizs theory of monads
fared less well, and was criticized
for its metaphysical extravagance.
In the 20th century, however, the
idea was rediscovered by scientists
who were intrigued by Leibnizs
description of space and time as
a system of relationships, rather
than the absolutes of traditional
Newtonian physics. 

138

TO BE IS TO
BE PERCEIVED
GEORGE BERKELEY (16851753)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Idealism
BEFORE
c.380 BCE In The Republic,
Plato presents his theory of
Forms, which states that the
world of our experience is an
imperfect shadow of reality.
AFTER
1781 Immanuel Kant develops
Berkeleys theory into
transcendental idealism,
according to which the
world that we experience
is only appearance.
1807 Georg Hegel replaces
Kants idealism with absolute
idealismthe theory that
absolute reality is Spirit.
1982 In his book The Case
for Idealism, the British
philosopher John Foster
argues for a version of
Berkeleys idealism.

L

ike John Locke before him,
George Berkeley was an
empiricist, meaning that
he saw experience as the primary
source of knowledge. This view,
which can be traced back to
Aristotle, stands in contrast to the
rationalist view that, in principle, all
knowledge can be gained through
rational reection alone. Berkeley
shared the same assumptions as
Locke, but reached very different
conclusions. According to Berkeley,
Lockes empiricism was moderate;
it still allowed for the existence of
a world independent of the senses,
and followed Ren Descartes in

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 139
See also: Plato 5055  Aristotle 5663  Ren Descartes 11623 
John Locke 13033  Immanuel Kant 16471  Georg Hegel 17885

from perception.

What we perceive
are ideas, not things
in themselves.

George Berkeley
So the world
consists only
of ideas...

... and minds that
perceive those ideas.

seeing humans as being made
up of two distinct substances,
namely mind and body.
Berkeleys empiricism, on the
other hand, was far more extreme,
and led him to a position known
as immaterialist idealism. This
means that he was a monist,
believing that there is only one
kind of substance in the universe,
and an idealist, believing that
this single substance is mind,
or thought, rather than matter.
Berkeleys position is often
summarized by the Latin phrase
esse est percipi (to be is to be
perceived), but it is perhaps 

A thing in
itself must lie
outside experience.

A thing only exists in
so far as it perceives
or is perceived.

There is no
such thing as
what philosophers call
material substance.
George Berkeley

George Berkeley was born and
brought up at Dysart Castle,
near the town of Kilkenny,
Ireland. He was educated rst
at Kilkenny College, then at
Trinity College, Dublin. In
1707 he was elected a Fellow
of Trinity, and was ordained
an Anglican priest. In 1714,
having written all his major
philosophical works, he left
Ireland to travel around
Europe, spending most
of his time in London.
When he returned to
Ireland he became Dean of
Derry. His main concern,
however, had become a
project to found a seminary
college in Bermuda. In 1728
he sailed to Newport, Rhode
Island, with his wife, Anne
Foster, and spent three years
trying to raise money for the
seminary. In 1731, when it
became clear that funds were
not forthcoming, he returned
to London. Three years later
he became Bishop of Cloyne,
Dublin, where he lived for
the rest of his life.
Key works
1710 Treatise Concerning the
Principles of Human Knowledge
1713 Three Dialogues Between
Hylas and Philonous

140 GEORGE BERKELEY

If there were
external bodies, it is
impossible we should
ever come to know it.
George Berkeley

An idea can be like nothing
but an idea; a color or
gure can be like nothing
but another color or gure.
George Berkeley

mistake it for a physical thing itself.
Ideas, then, can only resemble
other ideas. And as our only
experience of the world comes
through our ideas, any claim that
we can even understand the notion
of physical things is mistaken.
What we are really understanding
are mental things. The world is
constructed purely of thought, and
whatever is not itself perceiving,
exists only as one of our perceptions.

The cause of perception

better represented by esse est aut
perciperi aut percipi (to be is to
perceive or to be perceived). For
according to Berkeley, the world
consists only of perceiving minds
and their ideas. This is not to say
that he denies the existence of
the external world, or claims that
it is in any way different from what
we perceive. His claim is rather
that all knowledge must come
from experience, and that all we
ever have access to are our
perceptions. And since these
perceptions are simply ideas
(or mental representations), we
have no grounds for believing that
anything exists other than ideas
and the perceivers of ideas.

Causation and volition
Berkeleys target was Descartes
view of the world as elaborated
by Locke and the scientist Robert
Boyle. In this view, the physical
world is made up of a vast number
of physical particles, or corpuscles,
whose nature and interactions give
rise to the world as we understand
it. More controversially, for Berkeley,
this view also maintains that the
world causes the perceptual
ideas we have of it by the way
it interacts with our senses.

Berkeley has two main objections to
this view. First, he argues that our
understanding of causality (the fact
that certain events cause other
events) is based entirely on our
experience of our own volitions (the
way we cause events to happen
through the action of our wills).
His point is not simply that it is
wrong for us to project our own
experience of volitional action onto
the worldwhich we do when we
say that the world causes us to
have ideas about the world. His
point is that there is in fact no
such thing as a physical cause,
because there is no such thing as
a physical world beyond the world
of ideas that could possibly be the
cause of our ideas. The only type
of cause that there is in the world,
according to Berkeley, is precisely
the volitional kind of cause that is
the exercise of the will.
Berkeleys second objection is
that because ideas are mental
entities, they cannot resemble
physical entities, because the two
types of thing have completely
different properties. A painting or a
photograph can resemble a physical
object because it is itself a physical
thing, but to think of an idea as
resembling a physical object is to

If things that are not perceivers
only exist in so far as they are
perceived, however, this seems to
mean that when I leave the room,
my desk, computer, books, and so
on all cease to exist, for they are no
longer being perceived. Berkeleys
response to this is that nothing is
ever unperceived, for when I am
not in my room, it is still perceived
by God. His theory, therefore, not
only depends on the existence
of God, but of a particular type of
Godone who is constantly
involved in the world.
For Berkeley, Gods involvement
in the world runs deeper than this.
As we have seen, he claims that
there are no physical causes, but

Optical illusions are impossible, for
Berkeley, since an object is always as
it appears to be. A straw submerged
in water, for example, really is bent,
and a magnied object really is larger.

RENAISSANCE AND THE AGE OF REASON 141
only volitions, or acts of will, and
it follows that only an act of will can
produce the ideas that we have
about the world. However, I am not
in control of my experience of the
world, and cannot choose what I
experiencethe world simply
presents itself to me the way it does,
whether I like it or not. Therefore,
the volitions that cause my ideas
about the world are not mine; they
are Gods. So for Berkeley, God not
only creates us as perceivers, he is
the cause and constant generator
of all our perceptions. This raises
a number of questions, the most
urgent being: how is it that we
sometimes perceive things
incorrectly? Why would God
want to deceive us?
Berkeley tries to answer this
question by claiming that our
perceptions are never, in fact, in
error, and that where we go wrong is
in the judgements we make about
what we perceive. For example, if
an oar half-submerged in water
looks bent to me, then it really is
bentwhere I go wrong is thinking
that it only appears to be bent.
However, what happens if I reach
into the water and feel the oar? It
certainly feels straight. And since

Can a tree fall over if there is nobody
present to observe it? Objects only exist
while they are perceived, according
to Berkeley. However, the tree
can fall overbecause the
tree, and the rest of the
world, is always
perceived by God.

the oar cannot be both straight and
bent at the same time, there must
in fact be two oarsone that I
see and one that I feel. Even more
problematic for Berkeley, however,
is the fact that two different people
seeing the same oar must in fact be
seeing two different oars, for there
is no single, real oar out there
that their perceptions converge on.

The problem of solipsism

All the choir of heaven and
furniture of earthin a word,
all those bodies which
compose the frame of the
worldhave not any
subsistence without a mind.
George Berkeley

An inescapable fact of Berkeleys
system, therefore, seems to be that
we never perceive the same things.
Each of us is locked in his own
world, cut off from the worlds of
other people. The fact that God has
an idea of an oar cannot help us
here, for that is a third idea, and
therefore a third oar. God caused
my idea and your idea, but unless
we share a single mind with each
other and with God, there are still
three different ideas, so there are
three different oars. This leads us
to the problem of solipsismthe

possibility that the only thing I
can be certain of existingor
that may in fact existis myself.
One possible solution to
solipsism runs as follows: since I
can cause changes in the world,
such as raising my own hand, and
since I notice similar changes in
the bodies of other people, I can
infer that those bodies are also
changed by a consciousness
inside them. The problem for
Berkeley, though, is that there is no
real hand being liftedthe most
a person can do is be the cause of
the idea of his own hand rising
and only their idea, not another
persons. I, in other words, must
still rely on God to supply me with
my idea of another persons hand
rising. Far from supplying us with
empirical certainty, therefore,
Berkeley leaves us depending
for our knowledge of the world,
and of the existence of other
minds, upon our faith in a God
that would never deceive us. 

THE AGE
REVOLU
17501900

OF
TION

144 INTRODUCTION

Volume one of
Denis Diderots
Encyclopdie
is published.

Jean-Jacques Rousseaus
groundbreaking political
work, The Social Contract,
is published.

The American
Declaration of
Independence
is signed.

Immanuel Kant
publishes his Critique
of Pure Reason.

1751

1762

1776

1781

1759

1763

1780

1789

Voltaire publishes Candide,
a novel that satirizes Liebnizs
notion that all is for the best in
the best of all possible worlds.

The Treaty of Paris
makes Britain the
main colonial power
in North America.

Jeremy Bentham develops
the theory of utilitarianism
in his Introduction to the
Principles of Morals and
Legislation, eventually
published in 1789.

The storming of
the Bastille in Paris
marks the start
of the French
Revolution.

D

uring the Renaissance,
Europe had evolved into
a collection of separate
nation states, having previously
been a continent unied under the
control of the Church. As power
devolved to separate countries,
distinctive national cultures formed,
which were most obvious in arts
and literature, but could also be
seen in the philosophical styles that
emerged during the 17th century.
During the Age of Reason there
was a very clear difference between
the rationalism of continental
Europe and the empiricism of
British philosophers, and in the
18th century philosophy continued
to center on France and Britain, as
the Enlightenment period unfolded.
Old values and feudal systems
crumbled as the new nations
founded on trade gave rise to a

growing urban middle-class with
unprecedented prosperity. The
richest nations, such as Britain,
France, Spain, Portugal, and the
Netherlands, established colonies
and empires around the world.

France and Britain
Philosophy increasingly focused on
social and political issues, also along
national lines. In Britain, where a
revolution had already come and
gone, empiricism reached a peak
in the works of David Hume, while
the new utilitarianism dominated
political philosophy. This evolved
alongside the Industrial Revolution
that had started in the 1730s, as
thinkers such as John Stuart Mill
rened the utilitarianism of Jeremy
Bentham and helped to establish
both a liberal democracy and a
framework for modern civil rights.

The situation in France, however,
was less stable. The rationalism
of Ren Descartes gave way to a
generation of philosophes, radical
political philosophers who were to
popularize the new scientic way
of thinking. They included the
literary satirist Voltaire and the
encyclopedist Denis Diderot, but
the most revolutionary was JeanJacques Rousseau. His vision of a
society governed on the principles
of libert, egalit, and fraternit
(liberty, equality, and fraternity)
provided the battle cry of the
French Revolution in 1789, and has
inspired radical thinkers ever since.
Rousseau believed that civilization
was a corrupting inuence on
people, who are instinctively good,
and it was this part of his thinking
set the tone for Romanticism, the
movement that followed.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 145

Napoleon
Bonaparte
proclaims himself
Emperor of France.

Sren Kierkegaard
writes Either/Or and
Fear and Trembling.

Charles Darwin
publishes the Origin of
Species, explaining his
theory of evolution.

European powers
begin large-scale
colonization of the
African continent.

1802

184346

1859

188OS

1807

1848

1861

1890

Georg Hegel publishes
Phenomenology of Spirit.

Karl Marx publishes his
Communist Manifesto.
Revolutionary movements
sweep across Europe.

John Stuart Mill
publishes
Utilitarianism.

The leading
pragmatist
William James
publishes The
Principles of
Psychology.

In the Romantic period, European
literature, painting, and music
became preoccupied with an
idealized view of nature, in marked
contrast to the sophisticated urban
elegance of the Enlightenment.
Perhaps the key difference was the
way in which the Romantics valued
feeling and intuition above reason.
The movement took hold throughout
Europe, continuing until the end of
the 19th century.

German Idealism
German philosophy came to
dominate the 19th century, largely
due to the work of Immanuel Kant.
His idealist philosophy, which
claimed that we can never know
anything about things that exist
beyond our selves, radically altered
the course of philosophical thought.
Although only a few years younger

than Hume and Rousseau, Kant
belonged to the next generation:
his major philosophical works were
written after their deaths, and his
new explanation of the universe
and our knowledge of it managed
to integrate the approaches of
rationalism and empiricism in a way
more suited both to Romanticism
and to Germanic culture.
Kants followers included Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel, who together
became known as the German
Idealists, but also Schopenhauer,
whose idiosyncratic interpretation
of Kants philosophy incorporated
ideas from Eastern philosophy.
Among the followers of Hegels
rigid Idealism was Karl Marx, who
brilliantly brought together German
philosophical methods, French
revolutionary political philosophy,
and British economic theory. After

writing the Communist Manifesto
with Friedrich Engels, he wrote Das
Kapital, arguably one of the most
inuential philosophical works of all
time. Within decades of his death,
countries across the world had set
up revolutionary states on the
principles that he had proposed.
Meanwhile in the US, which
had overthrown British colonial rule
and established a republic based
on Enlightenment values, an
American culture independent
of its European roots began to
develop. At rst Romantic, by the
end of the 19th century it had
produced a homegrown strand
of philosophy, pragmatism, which
examines the nature of truth.
This was in keeping with the
countrys democratic roots and
well suited to the culture of
the new century. 

146

DOUBT IS NOT A
PLEASANT CONDITION,
BUT CERTAINTY
IS
ABSURD
VOLTAIRE (16941778)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Scepticism
BEFORE
350 BCE Aristotle makes
the rst reference to a childs
mind as a blank slate,
which later became known
as a tabula rasa.
1690S John Locke argues that
sense experience allows both
children and adults to acquire
reliable knowledge about the
external world.
AFTER
1859 John Stuart Mill argues
against assuming our own
infallibility in On Liberty.
1900S Hans-Georg Gadamer
and the postmodernists apply
sceptical reasoning to all
forms of knowledge, even that
gained through empirical
(sense-based) information.

V

oltaire was a French
intellectual who lived in
the Age of Enlightenment.
This period was characterized by
an intense questioning of the world
and how people live in it. European
philosophers and writers turned
their attention to the acknowledged
authoritiessuch as the Church
and stateto question their validity
and their ideas, while also searching
for new perspectives. Until the 17th
century, Europeans had largely
accepted the Churchs explanations

of what, why, and how things
existed, but both scientists and
philosophers had begun to
demonstrate different approaches
to establishing the truth. In 1690
the philosopher John Locke had
argued that no ideas were innate
(known at birth), and that all ideas
arise from experience alone. His
argument was given further weight
by scientist Isaac Newton whose
experiments provided new ways of
discovering truths about the world.
It was against this background of

Every fact and theory
in history has been
revised at some point.

We are not born with
ideas and concepts
already in our heads.

Every idea and theory
can be challenged.

Doubt is not a
pleasant condition, but
certainty is absurd.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 147
See also: Aristotle 5663  John Locke 13033  David Hume 14853
Hans-Georg Gadamer 26061  Karl Popper 26265



John Stuart Mill 19093



Scientic experiments during the
Age of Enlightenment seemed to
Voltaire to lead the way toward a
better world, based on empirical
evidence and unabashed curiosity.

rebellion against the accepted
traditions that Voltaire pronounced
that certainty is absurd.
Voltaire refutes the idea of
certainty in two ways. First, he
points out that apart from a few
necessary truths of mathematics
and logic, nearly every fact and
theory in history has been revised
at some point in time. So what
appears to be fact is actually little
more than a working hypothesis.
Second, he agrees with Locke that
there is no such thing as an innate
idea, and points out that ideas we
seem to know as true from birth
may be only cultural, as these
change from country to country.

Revolutionary doubt
Voltaire does not assert that there
are no absolute truths, but he sees
no means of reaching them. For
this reason he thinks doubt is the

Voltaire

only logical standpoint. Given that
endless disagreement is therefore
inevitable, Voltaire says that it is
important to develop a system, such
as science, to establish agreement.
In claiming that certainty is
more pleasant than doubt, Voltaire
hints at how much easier it is
simply to accept authoritative
statementssuch as those issued
by the monarchy or Churchthan
it is to challenge them and think

for yourself. But Voltaire believes
it is vitally important to doubt
every fact and to challenge all
authority. He holds that government
should be limited but speech
uncensored, and that science and
education lead to material and
moral progress. These were
fundamental ideals of both the
Enlightenment and the French
Revolution, which took place
11 years after Voltaires death. 

Voltaire was the pseudonym of
the French writer and thinker,
Franois Marie Arouet. He was
born into a middle-class family in
Paris, and was the youngest of
three children. He studied law
at university, but always preferred
writing, and by 1715 was famous
as a great literary wit. His satirical
writing often landed him in trouble:
he was imprisoned several times
for insulting nobility, and was
once exiled from France. This led
to a stay in England, where he fell
under the inuence of English
philosophy and science. After
returning to France he became

wealthy through speculation,
and was thereafter able to
devote himself to writing. He
had several long and scandalous
affairs, and travelled widely
throughout Europe. In later life
Voltaire campaigned vigorously
for legal reform and against
religious intolerance, in France
and further aeld.
Key works
1733 Philosophical Letters
1734 Treatise on Metaphysics
1759 Candide
1764 Philosophical Dictionary

CUSTOM

LIFE
IS THE GREAT GUIDE OF HUMAN

DAVID HUME (17111776)

150 DAVID HUME
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Empiricism
BEFORE
1637 Ren Descartes
espouses rationalism in his
Discourse on the Method.
1690 John Locke sets out the
case for empiricism in An
Essay Concerning Human
Understanding.
AFTER
1781 Immanuel Kant is
inspired by Hume to write
his Critique of Pure Reason.
1844 Arthur Schopenhauer
acknowledges his debt to
Hume in The World as Will
and Representation.

D

avid Hume was born at
a time when European
philosophy was dominated
by a debate about the nature of
knowledge. Ren Descartes had
in effect set the stage for modern
philosophy in his Discourse on the
Method, instigating a movement
of rationalism in Europe, which
claimed that knowledge can be
arrived at by rational reection
alone. In Britain, John Locke had
countered this with his empiricist
argument that knowledge can only
be derived from experience. George
Berkeley had followed, formulating
his own version of empiricism,
according to which the world only
exists in so far as it is perceived.
But it was Hume, the third of the
major British empiricists, who dealt
the biggest blow to rationalism in
an argument presented in his
Treatise of Human Nature.

Humes fork

1934 Karl Popper proposes
falsication as the basis for the
scientic method, as opposed
to observation and induction.

With a remarkable clarity of
language, Hume turns a sceptical
eye to the problem of knowledge,
and argues forcibly against the
notion that we are born with
innate ideas (a central tenet of
rationalism). He does so by rst

David Hume

Born in Edinburgh, Scotland, in
1711, Hume was a precocious
child who entered the University
of Edinburgh at the age of 12.
Around 1729 he devoted his time
to nding some medium by
which truth might be established,
and after working himself into a
nervous breakdown he moved to
La Flche in Anjou, France. Here
he wrote A Treatise of Human
Nature, setting out virtually all
his philosophical ideas before
returning to Edinburgh.
In 1763 he was appointed to
the Embassy in Paris, where he
befriended the philosopher

dividing the contents of our minds
into two kinds of phenomena, and
then asking how these relate to
each other. The two phenomena
are impressionsor direct
perceptions, which Hume calls
the sensations, passions, and
emotionsand ideas, which
are faint copies of our impressions,
such as thoughts, reections,
and imaginings. And it is while
analyzing this distinction that
Hume draws an unsettling
conclusionone that calls into
question our most cherished

In our reasonings
concerning fact, there are
all imaginable degrees
of assurance. A wise man
therefore proportions his
belief to the evidence.
David Hume

Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
became more widely known as
a philosopher. The controversial
Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion occupied Humes nal
years and, because of what he
called his abundant caution,
were only published after his
death in Edinburgh in 1776.
Key works
1739 A Treatise of Human Nature
1748 An Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding
1779 Dialogues Concerning
Natural Religion

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 151
See also: Plato 5055
Immanuel Kant 16471




Aristotle 5663  Ren Descartes 11623  John Locke 13033
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651  Karl Popper 26265

beliefs, not only about logic and
science, but about the nature of
the world around us.
The problem, for Hume, is that
very often we have ideas that cannot
be supported by our impressions,
and Hume concerns himself with
nding the extent to which this is
the case. To understand what
he means, we need to note that for
Hume there are only two kinds of
statementnamely demonstrative
and probable statementsand he
claims that in everyday experience
we somehow confuse the two types
of knowledge that these express.
A demonstrative statement is
one whose truth or falsity is selfevident. Take, for example, the
statement 2 + 2 = 4. Denying this
statement involves a logical
contradictionin other words, to
claim that 2 + 2 does not equal 4
is to fail to grasp the meanings of
the terms 2 or 4 (or + or =).
Demonstrative statements in logic,
mathematics, and deductive
reasoning are known to be true or
false a priori, meaning prior to
experience. The truth of a 

Mathematics and logic yield what
Hume calls demonstrative truths,
which cannot be denied without
contradiction. These are the only
certainties in Humes philosophy.



George Berkeley 13841



I get into
a habit of expecting
the sun to rise
every morning.

I see the sun rise
every morning.

I rene this into the
judgment the sun rises
every morning.

This judgment cannot
be a truth of logic, because
the sun not rising (however
unlikely that seems to us)
is conceivable.

This judgment cannot
be empirical, because
I cannot observe future
risings of the sun.

I have no rational
grounds for my belief,
but custom tells me
that it is probable.

Custom is the great
guide of life.

152 DAVID HUME
probable statement, however, is not
self-evident, for it is concerned with
matters of empirical fact. For
example, any statement about the
world such as Jim is upstairs, is
a probable statement because it
requires empirical evidence for it
to be known to be true or false. In
other words, its truth or falsity can
only be known through some kind
of experimentsuch as by going
upstairs to see if Jim is there.
In light of this, we can ask of
any statement whether it is probable
or demonstrative. If it is neither of
these, then we cannot know it to
be true or false, and so, for Hume,
it is a meaningless statement. This
division of all statements into two

possible kinds, as if forming the
horns of a dilemma, is often referred
to as Humes fork.

Inductive reasoning
There are no surprises in Humes
reasoning so far, but things take
a strange turn when he applies
this line of argument to inductive
inferenceour ability to infer things
from past evidence.We observe an
unchanging pattern, and infer that
it will continue in the future, tacitly
assuming that nature will continue
to behave in a uniform way. For
example, we see the sun rise every
morning, and infer that it will rise
again tomorrow. But is our claim
that nature follows this uniform
The grounds for our belief that
the sun will rise tomorrow, or that
water rather than fruit will ow from
a faucet, are not logical, according to
Hume. They are simply the result of
our conditioning, which teaches us
that tomorrow the world will be
the same as it is today.

pattern really justiable? Claiming
that the sun will rise tomorrow is
not a demonstrative statement, as
claiming the opposite involves no
logical contradiction. Nor is it a
probable statement, as we cannot
experience the suns future risings.
The same problem occurs if we
apply Humes fork to the evidence
for causality. The statement event
A causes event B seems on the
face of it to be one that we can
verify, but again, this does not
stand up to scrutiny. There is no
logical contradiction involved in
denying that A causes B (as there
would be in denying that 2 + 2 = 4),
so it cannot be a demonstrative
statement. Nor can it be proved
empirically, since we cannot observe
every event A to see if it is followed
by B, so it is not a probable
statement either. The fact that, in
our limited experience, B invariably
follows A is no rational ground for
believing that A will always be
followed by B, or that A causes B.
If there is never any rational
basis for inferring cause and effect,
then what justication do we have
for making that connection? Hume
explains this simply as human
naturea mental habit that reads
uniformity into regular repetition,
and a causal connection into what

Nature, by an absolute and
uncontrollable necessity,
has determined us to judge
as well as to breathe and feel.
David Hume

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 153
Science supplies us with ever more
detailed information about the world.
However, according to Hume, science
deals with theories only, and can never
yield a law of nature.

he calls the constant conjunction
of events. Indeed, it is this kind of
inductive reasoning that is the
basis of science, and tempts us to
interpret our inferences as laws
of naturebut despite what we
may think, this practice cannot
be justied by rational argument.
In saying this, Hume makes his
strongest case against rationalism,
for he is saying that it is belief (which
he denes as a lively idea related
to or associated with a present
impression), guided by custom,
that lies at the heart of our claims
to knowledge rather than reason.

Custom as our guide
Hume goes on to acknowledge that
although inductive inferences are
not provable, this does not mean
that they are not useful. After all,
we still have a reasonable claim
to expect something to happen,
judging from past observation and
experience. In the absence of a
rational justication for inductive
inference, custom is a good guide.
Hume adds, however, that this
mental habit should be applied
with caution. Before inferring cause
and effect between two events,
we should have evidence both that
this succession of events has been
invariable in the past, and that there
is a necessary connection between
them. We can reasonably predict
that when we let go of an object it
will fall to the ground, because this
is what has always happened in
the past, and there is an obvious
connection between letting go of
the object and its falling. On the
other hand, two clocks set a few
seconds apart will chime one after

anotherbut since there is no
obvious connection between them,
we should not infer that one clocks
chiming is the cause of the others.
Humes treatment of the problem
of induction, as this became known,
both undermines the claims of
rationalism and elevates the role of
belief and custom in our lives. As he
says, the conclusions drawn by our
beliefs are as satisfactory to the
mind... as the demonstrative kind.

remained a signicant inuence
on German philosophers of the 19th
century and the logical positivists of
the 20th century, who believed that
only meaningful statements could
be veriable. Humes account of
the problem of induction remained
unchallenged throughout this period,
and resurfaced in the work of Karl
Popper, who used it to back up his
claim that a theory can only be
deemed scientic if it is falsiable. 

A revolutionary idea
The brilliantly argued and innovative
ideas in the Treatise of Human
Nature were virtually ignored when
they were published in 1739, despite
being the high-point of British
empiricism. Hume was better
known in his own country for being
the author of a History of Great
Britain than for his philosophy; in
Germany, however, the signicance
of his epistemology had more
impact. Immanuel Kant admitted
to being woken from his dogmatic
slumbers by reading Hume, who

Hume was perfectly
right in pointing out
that induction cannot be
logically justied.
Karl Popper

MAN WAS BORN

FREE
YET EVERYWHERE HE

IS IN CHAINS
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU (17121778)

156 JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy

Man in a
state of nature is
fundamentally good.

When the idea of
private property developed,
society had to develop
a system to protect it.

APPROACH
Social contract theory
BEFORE
1651 Thomas Hobbes puts
forward the idea of a social
contract in his book Leviathan.
1689 John Lockes Two
Treatises of Government
asserts a humans natural right
to defend life, health, liberty,
or possessions.

This system evolved
as laws imposed by
those with property onto
those without property

These laws bind
people in unjust ways.

AFTER
1791 Thomas Paines Rights of
Man argues that governments
only purpose is to safeguard
the rights of the individual.
1848 Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels publish The
Communist Manifesto.
1971 John Rawls develops the
idea of Justice as Fairness in
his book A Theory of Justice.

R

ousseau was very much a
product of the mid- to late18th-century period known
as the Enlightenment, and an
embodiment of the continental
European philosophy of the time.
As a young man he tried to make
his name as both a musician and
composer, but in 1740 he met Denis
Diderot and Jean dAlembert, the
philosopher compilers of the new
Encyclopdie, and became
interested in philosophy. The
political mood in France at this
time was uneasy. Enlightenment
thinkers in France and England had

Man is born free,
yet everywhere
he is in chains.

begun to question the status quo,
undermining the authority of both
the Church and the aristocracy,
and advocates of social reform such
as Voltaire continually fell foul of
the overbearing censorship of the
establishment. Unsurprisingly in
this context, Rousseaus main
area of interest became political
philosophy. His thinking was
inuenced not only by his French
contemporaries, but also by the
work of English philosophersand
in particular the idea of a social
contract as proposed by Thomas
Hobbes and rened by John Locke.

Like them, Rousseau compared an
idea of humanity in a hypothetical
natural state with how people
actually live in a civil society.
But he took such a radically
different view of this natural
state and the way it is affected
by society, that it could be
considered a form of counterEnlightenment thinking. It held
within it the seeds of the next
great movement, Romanticism.

Science and art corrupt
Hobbes had envisaged life in the
natural state as solitary, poor,

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 157
See also: Thomas Hobbes 11215  John Locke 13033  Edmund Burke 17273
John Stuart Mill 19093  Karl Marx 196203  John Rawls 29495

nasty, brutish, and short. In his
view humanity is instinctively selfinterested and self-serving, and
that civilization is necessary to place
restrictions on these instincts.
Rousseau, however, looks more
kindly on human nature, and sees
civil society as a much less
benevolent force.
The idea that society might be
a harmful inuence rst occurred
to Rousseau when he wrote an essay
for a competition organized by the
Academy of Dijon, answering the
question: Has the restoration of the
sciences and the arts contributed
to rening moral practices? The
expected answer from thinkers of
the time, and especially from a
musician such as Rousseau, was an
enthusiastic afrmative, but in fact
Rousseau argued the opposite case.
His Discourse on the Sciences and
Arts, which won him rst prize,



controversially puts forward the idea
that the arts and sciences corrupt
and erode morals. He argues that far
from improving minds and lives, the
arts and sciences decrease human
virtue and happiness.

The inequality of laws
Having broken with established
thinking in his prize-winning and
publicly acclaimed essay, Rousseau
took the idea a stage further in a
second essay, the Discourse on the
Origin and Foundations of Inequality
among Men. The subject matter
chimed with the mood of the time,
echoing the calls for social reform
from writers such as Voltaire, but 
The Romantic movement in art
and literature that dominated the late
18th and early 19th centuries reected
Rousseaus vision of the state of nature
as one of beauty, innocence, and virtue.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Jacques Rousseau was
born to a Calvinist family in
Geneva. His mother died only
a few days after his birth, and
his father ed home following
a duel a few years later, leaving
him in the care of an uncle.
Aged 16, he left for France
and converted to Catholicism.
While trying to make his name
as a composer, he worked as a
civil servant and was posted to
Venice for two years, but on
his return he began to write
philosophy. His controversial
views led to his books being
banned in Switzerland and
France, and warrants being
issued for his arrest. He was
forced to accept David Humes
invitation to live in England for
a short time, but after they
quarrelled he returned to
France under a false name. He
was later allowed to return to
Paris, where he lived until his
death at the age of 66.
Key works
1750 Discourse on the Sciences
and Arts
1755 Discourse on the Origin
and Foundations of Inequality
among Men
1755 Discourse on Political
Economy
1762 The Social Contract

158 JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU
once again Rousseau contradicted
conventional thinking with his
analysis. The selsh, savage, and
unjust state of nature depicted
by Hobbes is, for Rousseau, a
description not of natural man,
but of civilized man. In fact
he claims that it is civil society
that induces this savage state.
Humanitys natural state, he
argues, is innocent, happy, and
independent: man is born free.

Society corrupts
The state of nature that Rousseau
describes is a pastoral idyll, where
people in their natural state are
fundamentally good. (The English
wrongly interpreted Rousseaus idea
of natural man as a noble savage,
but this was due to a mistranslation
of the French sauvage, which means
simply natural, not brutish.) People
are endowed with innate virtue
and, more importantly, the attributes
of compassion and empathy. But

once this state of innocence is
disrupted, and the power of reason
begins to separate humankind from
the rest of nature, people become
detached from their natural virtues.
The imposition of civil society on
the state of nature therefore entails
a move away from virtue toward
vice, and from idyllic happiness
toward misery.
Rousseau sees the fall from a
state of nature and the establishment
of civil society as regrettable but
inevitable, because it resulted from
the human capacity for reason. The
process began, he thought, the rst
time that a man enclosed a piece
of land for himself, so introducing
the notion of property. As groups
of people began to live side by side
like this, they formed societies,
which could only be maintained
though a system of laws. But
Rousseau claims that every society
loses touch with humanitys natural
virtues, including empathy, and so
imposes laws that are not just,
but selsh. They are designed to
protect property, and they are
inicted on the poor by the rich.
The move from a natural to a
civilized state therefore brought
about a move not only from virtue
to vice, Rousseau points out, but
also from innocence and freedom
to injustice and enslavement.
Although humanity is naturally
virtuous, it is corrupted by society;
and although man is born free, the
laws imposed by society condemn
him to a life in chains.

The Social Contract

Adam and Eve represent the kind of
perfect natural humans that Rousseau
thought predated society. He said that we,
like them, are corrupted by knowledge,
becoming ever more selsh and unhappy.

Rousseaus second Discourse rufed
even more feathers than his rst,
but it gained him a reputation and
quite a following. His portrayal of
the state of nature as desirable and
not brutal formed a vital part of the
emerging Romantic movement in
literature. Rousseaus rallying cry of

Tranquility is found also
in dungeons; but is that
enough to make them
desirable places to live in?
Jean-Jacques
Rousseau

back to nature! and his pessimistic
analysis of modern society as full of
inequalities and injustices sat well
with the growing social unrest of
the 1750s, especially in France.
Not content with merely stating
the problem, Rousseau went on to
offer a solution, in what is seen as
perhaps his most inuential work,
The Social Contract.
Rousseau opens his book with
the challenging declaration Man is
born free, yet everywhere he is in
chains, which was considered such
a call for radical change that it was
adopted as a slogan during the
French Revolution 27years later.
Having issued his challenge,
Rousseau then sets out his vision of
an alternative civil society, run not
by aristocrats, the monarchy, and
the Church, but by all citizens, who
participate in the business of
legislation. Modelled on Classical
republican ideas of democracy,
Rousseau imagines the citizen
body operating as a unit,
prescribing laws according to the
volont gnrale, or general will.
The laws would arise from all and
apply to alleveryone would be
considered equal. In contrast with
the social contract envisaged by
Locke, which was designed to

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 159

The general will
should come from all
to apply to all.
Jean-Jacques
Rousseau

protect the rights and property of
individuals, Rousseau advocates
giving legislative power to the
people as a whole, for the benet
of all, administered by the general
will. He believes that the freedom to
take part in the legislative process
would lead to an elimination of
inequality and injustice, and that
it would promote a feeling of
belonging to societythat it would
inevitably lead to the libert,
galit, fraternit (liberty, equality,
fraternity) that became the motto
of the new French Republic.

The evils of education
In another book written in the same
year, entitled Emile, or On Education,
Rousseau expanded on his theme,
explaining that education was
responsible for corrupting the state
of nature and perpetuating the evils
of modern society. In other books
and essays he concentrated on the
adverse effects of both conventional
religion and atheism. At the center
of all his works lay the idea that
The French Revolution, which
began 11years after Rousseaus death,
was inspired by his claim that it was
unjust for the rich few to rule over the
effectively voiceless, powerless poor.

reason threatens human innocence
and, in turn, freedom and happiness.
Instead of the education of the
intellect, he proposes an education
of the senses, and he suggests that
our religious faith should be guided
by the heart, not the head.

Political inuence
Most of Rousseaus writings were
immediately banned in France,
gaining him both notoriety and a
large following. By the time of his
death in 1778, revolution in France
and elsewhere was imminent, and
his idea of a social contract in which
the general will of the citizen body
controlled the legislative process
offered the revolutionaries a viable
alternative to the corrupt system as
it stood. But his philosophy was at
odds with contemporary thinking,
and his insistence that a state of
nature was superior to civilization
led him to fall out with fellow
reformers such as Voltaire and Hume.

Rousseaus political inuence was
felt most strongly during the period
of revolution immediately after
his death, but his inuence on
philosophy, and political philosophy
in particular, emerged to a greater
extent in the 19th century. Georg
Hegel integrated Rousseaus ideas
of social contract into his own
philosophical system. Later and
more importantly, Karl Marx was
particularly struck by some of
Rousseaus work on inequality and
injustice. Unlike Robespierre, one of
the leaders of the French Revolution,
who had appropriated Rousseaus
philosophy for his own ends during
the Reign of Terror, Marx fully
understood and developed
Rousseaus analysis of capitalist
society and the revolutionary
means of replacing it. Marxs
Communist Manifesto ends with
a nod to Rousseau, encouraging
the proletarians (workers) have
nothing to lose but their chains. 

160

MAN IS AN
ANIMAL THAT
MAKES
BARGAINS
ADAM SMITH (17231790)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Classical economics
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Aristotle emphasizes
the importance of domestic
production (economy) and
explains the role of money.
Early 1700s Dutch thinker
Bernard Mandeville argues
that selsh actions can
lead indirectly to socially
desirable consequences.
AFTER
1850s British writer John
Ruskin argues that Smiths
views are too materialistic
and therefore anti-Christian.
1940s onward Philosophers
apply the idea of bargaining
throughout the social sciences
as a model for explaining
human behavior.

S

cottish writer Adam Smith
is often considered the most
important economist the
world has ever known. The concepts
of bargaining and self-interest that
he explored, and the possibility of
different types of agreements and
interestssuch as the common
interestare of recurring appeal
to philosophers. His writings are
also important because they give
a more general and abstract form
to the idea of the commercial
society that was developed by
his friend David Hume.
Like his Swiss contemporary,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Smith
assumes that the motives of human
beings are partly benevolent and

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 161
See also: David Hume 14853  Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459 
Edmund Burke 17273  Karl Marx 196203  Noam Chomsky 30405

People act out
of self-interest.

We often require
goods and services
that others provide.

Adam Smith
We must therefore
agree to exchange
goods or money between
us in a way that benets
both parties.

Man is
an animal
that makes
bargains.

partly self-interested, but that
self-interest is the stronger trait
and so is a better guide to human
behavior. He believes that this can
be conrmed by social observation,
and so, broadly speaking, his
approach is an empirical one. In one
of his most famous discussions of
the psychology of bargaining, he
contends that the most frequent
opening gambit in a bargain is for
one party to urge the otherthe
best way for you to get what you
want is for you to give me what I
want. In other words, we address
ourselves, not to [anothers]
humanity, but to their self-love.
Smith goes on to claim that
the exchange of useful objects is a
distinctively human characteristic.
He notes that dogs are never
observed exchanging bones, and
that should an animal wish to
obtain something, the only way it
can do so is to gain the favor of
those whose service it requires.
Humans may also depend on this
sort of fawning or servile attention,
but they cannot resort to it whenever

they need help, because life requires
the cooperation and assistance of
great multitudes. For example, to
stay comfortably at an inn for a
night we require the input of many
peopleto cook and serve the food,
to prepare the room and so on
none of whose services can be
depended on through good will
alone. For this reason, man is an
animal that makes bargainsand
the bargain is struck by proposing
a deal that appears to be in the
self-interest of both parties.

The division of labor
In his account of the emergence of
market economies, Smith argues
that our ability to make bargains
put an end to the once universal
requirement that every person,
or at least every family, be
economically self-sufcient. Thanks
to bargaining, it became possible
for us to concentrate on producing
fewer and fewer goods, and
ultimately to produce just a single
good, or offer a single service, and
to exchange this for everything 

The father of modern
economics was born in
Kirkcaldy, Fife, in 1723. An
academic prodigy, Smith
became a professor rst at
Edinburgh University, then at
Glasgow University where he
became a professor in 1750. In
the 1760s, he took a lucrative
job as a personal tutor to a
young Scottish aristocrat,
Henry Scott, with whom he
visited France and Switzerland.
Already acquainted with
David Hume and other Scottish
Enlightenment thinkers, he
seized the chance to meet
leading gures of the European
Enlightenment as well. On his
return to Scotland, he spent a
decade writing The Wealth of
Nations, before returning to
public service as Commissioner
of Customs, a position that
allowed him to advise the
British government on various
economic policies. In 1787, he
rejoined Glasgow University,
and spent the last three years
of his life as its rector.
Key works
1759 The Theory of Moral
Sentiments
1776 The Wealth of Nations
1795 Essays on Philosophical
Subjects

162 ADAM SMITH
else we required. This process was
revolutionized by the invention of
money, which abolished the need
to barter. From then on, in Smiths
view, only those who were unable
to work had to depend on charity.
Everyone else could come to the
marketplace to exchange their
laboror the money they earned
through laborfor the products
of other peoples labor.
This elimination of the need to
provide everything for ourselves led
to the emergence of people with
particular sets of skills (such as
the baker and the carpenter), and
then to what Smith calls a division
of labor among workers. This is
Smiths phrase for specialization,
whereby an individual not only
pursues a single type of work, but
performs only a single task in a job
that is shared by several people.
The market is the key to establishing
an equitable society, in Smiths view.
With the freedom provided by the
buying and selling of goods, individuals
can enjoy lives of natural liberty.

The greatest improvement
in the productive
powers of labor seem
to have been the effects
of the division of labor.
Adam Smith

Civilized society stands
at all times in need of
the cooperation
and assistance
of great multitudes.
Adam Smith

Smith illustrates the importance of
specialization at the beginning of
his masterpiece, The Wealth of
Nations, by showing how the
making of a humble metal pin is
radically improved by adopting the
factory system. Where one man
working alone would nd it hard
to produce 20 perfect pins in a day,
a group of 10 men, charged with
different tasksfrom drawing out
the wire, straightening it, cutting

it, pointing it, and grinding it, to
joining it to a pinheadwere able,
in Smiths time, to produce over
48,000 pins a day.
Smith was impressed by
the great improvements in the
productivity of labor that took place
during the Industrial Revolution
improvements that saw workers
provided with much better
equipment, and often saw
machines replacing workers.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 163
The jack-of-all-trades could not
survive in such a system, and even
philosophers began to specialize
in the various branches of their
subject, such as logic, ethics,
epistemology, and metaphysics.

The free market
Because the division of labor
increases productivity and makes it
possible for everyone to be eligible
for some kind of work (since it frees
us from training in a craft), Smith
argues that it can lead to universal
wealth in a well-ordered society.
Indeed, he says that in conditions
of perfect liberty, the market can
lead to a state of perfect equality
one in which everyone is free to
pursue his own interests in his own
way, so long as it accords with the
laws of justice. And by equality
Smith is not referring to equality
of opportunity, but to equality of
condition. In other words, his goal
is the creation of a society not
divided by competitiveness, but
drawn together by bargaining
based on mutual self-interest.
Smiths point, therefore, is not
that people should have freedom just
because they deserve it. His point is
that society as a whole benets from
individuals pursuing their own
interests. For the invisible hand of
the market, with its laws of supply
and demand, regulates the amount
of goods that are available, and
prices them far more efciently than
any government could. Put simply,
the pursuit of self-interest, far
from being incompatible with an
equitable society, is, in Smiths view,
the only way of guaranteeing it.
In such a society, a government
can limit itself to performing just a
few essential functions, such as
providing defense, criminal justice,
and education, and taxes and duties
can be reduced accordingly. And
just as bargaining can ourish

within national boundaries, so it
can ourish across them, leading to
international tradea phenomenon
that was spreading across the
world in Smiths time.
Smith recognized that there
were problems with the notion of
a free marketin particular with
the increasingly common bargain
of wages for working time. He also
acknowledged that while the
division of labor had huge
economic benets, repetitive work
is not only boring for the worker, it
can destroy a human beingand
for this reason he proposed that
governments should restrict the
extent to which the production
line is used. Nevertheless, when
The Wealth of Nations was rst
published, its doctrine of free and
unregulated trade was seen as
revolutionary, not only because of
its attack on established commercial
and agricultural privileges and
monopolies, but also because of its
argument that a nations wealth
depends not on its gold reserves,
but on its labora view that went
against all economic thinking in
Europe at the time.
Smiths reputation for being a
revolutionary was bolstered during
the long debate about the nature
of society that followed the French
Revolution of 1789, prompting the
mid-Victorian historian H.T. Buckle
to describe The Wealth of Nations
as probably the most important
book that has ever been written.

Smiths legacy
Critics have argued that Smith was
wrong to assume that the general
interest and consumer interest
are the same, and that the free
market is benecial to all. What is
true is that even though Smith was
sympathetic toward the victims of
poverty, he never fully succeeded in
balancing the interests of producers

The production line is an incredible
money-creating machine, but Smith
warns against the dehumanizing
effects it can have on workers if it
is used without regulation.

and consumers within his social
model, or integrating into it the
domestic labor, performed mainly
by women, that helped to keep
society running efciently.
For these reasons, and with the
rise of socialism in the 19th century,
Smiths reputation declined, but
renewed interest in free market
economics in the late 20th century
saw a revival of Smiths ideas.
Indeed, only today can we fully
appreciate his most visionary
claimthat a market is more than
just a place. A market is a concept,
and as such can exist anywhere
not only in a designated place such
as a town square. This foreshadows
the kind of virtual marketplace
that only became possible with the
advent of telecommunications
technology. Todays nancial
markets and online trading bear
witness to Smiths great vision. 

THERE ARE TWO WORLDS:

OUR BODIES
AND THE EXTERNAL

WORLD
IMMANUEL KANT (17241804)

166 IMMANUEL KANT
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Transcendental idealism
BEFORE
1641 Ren Descartes
publishes his Meditations, in
which he doubts all knowledge
apart from the knowledge of
his own consciousness.
1739 David Hume publishes
his Treatise of Human Nature,
which suggests limitations
on how the human mind
perceives reality.
AFTER
19th century The German
idealist movement develops in
response to Kants philosophy.
1900s Edmund Husserl
develops phenomenology, the
study of objects of experience,
using Kants understanding
of consciousness.

I

mmanuel Kant thought it was
scandalous that in more than
2,000 years of philosophical
thought, nobody had been able to
produce an argument to prove that
there really is a world out there,
external to us. He particularly had
in mind the theories of Ren
Descartes and George Berkeley,
who both entertained doubts about
the existence of an external world.
At the start of his Meditations,
Descartes argued that we must
doubt all knowledge except that
of our own existence as thinking
beingseven the knowledge that
there is an external world. He then

went on to counter this sceptical
point of view with an argument
that claims to prove the existence
of God, and therefore the reality of
an outside world. However, many
philosophers (including Kant) have
not found Descartes proof of God
to be valid in its reasoning.
Berkeley, on the other hand,
argued that knowledge is indeed
possiblebut that it comes from
experiences our consciousness
perceives. We have no justication
for believing that these experiences
have any external existence outside
our own minds.

Time and consciousness
Kant wants to demonstrate that
there is an external, material world,
and that its existence cannot be
doubted. His argument begins as
follows: in order for something to
exist, it must be determinable in
timethat is, we must be able to
say when it exists and for how long.
But how does this work in the case
of my own consciousness?
Although consciousness seems
to be constantly changing with a
continuous ow of sensations and
thoughts, we can use the word
now to refer to what is currently
happening in our consciousness.
But now is not a determinate time
or date. Every time I say now,
consciousness is different.
Here lies the problem: what
makes it possible to specify the
when of my own existence? We
cannot experience time itself,
directly; rather, we experience time
through things that move, change,
or stay the same. Consider the
hands of a clock, constantly moving
slowly around. The moving hands
are useless for determining time on
their ownthey need something
against which they change, such as
the numbers on a clock face. Every
resource I have for measuring my

According to Kant, we can only
experience time through things in the
world that move or change, such as
the hands of a clock. So time is only
ever experienced by us indirectly.

constantly changing now is found
in material objects outside me in
space (including my own physical
body). Saying that I exist requires
a determinate point in time, and
this, in turn, requires an actually
existing outside world in which
time takes place. My level of
certainty about the existence of the
external world is thus precisely the
same as my level of certainty about
the existence of consciousness,
which Descartes believed was
absolutely certain.

The problem of science
Kant also looked at how science
understood the exterior world. He
admired the awesome progress
that the natural sciences had made
over the previous two centuries,
compared with the relative
stagnation in the subject from
ancient times until that point. Kant,
along with other philosophers,
wondered what was suddenly being
done correctly in scientic research.
The answer given by many thinkers
of the period was empiricism. The
empiricists, such as John Locke
and David Hume, argued that there
is no knowledge except that which

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 167
See also: Ren Descartes 11623  John Locke 13033  George Berkeley 13841  David Hume 14853 
Johann Gottlieb Fichte 176  Georg Hegel 17885  Friedrich Schelling 335  Arthur Schopenhauer 18688

comes to us through our experience
of the world. They opposed the
views of rationalist philosophers,
such as Descartes or Gottfried
Leibniz, who argued that the
minds ability to reason and deal
with concepts is more important
for knowledge than experience.
The empiricists claimed that
the recent success of science
was due to scientists being much
more careful in their observations
of the world than they had been
previously, and making fewer
unjustied assumptions based
on reason alone. Kant argues that
although this is no doubt partly
true, it could not be the whole
answer, as it is simply false to say
that there was no detailed and
careful empirical observation in
science before the 16th century.
The real issue, Kant argues, is
that a new scientic method arose
that made empirical observations
valuable. This method involves
two elements. First, it asserts that
concepts such as force or movement
can be perfectly described by
mathematics. Second, it tests its
own conceptions of the world by
asking specic questions about
nature and observing the answers. 

Our sensibility is the
ability to sense things
in the world.

Our understanding
is the ability to think
about things.

Space and time
cannot be learned
about through experience;
they are intuitions
of the mind.

So a thing appears
in space and time only
insofar as it is sensed
by our minds.

Concepts only apply
to things insofar
as they are sensed
by our minds.

A thing-in-itself
(something considered exterior
to our minds) may have nothing
to do with space,time,
or any of our concepts.

It is precisely in
knowing its limits that
philosophy exists.
Immanuel Kant
Things-in-themselves
are unknowable.

There are two
worlds: the world of
experience sensed
by our bodies and
the world as it
is in itself.

168 IMMANUEL KANT

Thoughts without content
are empty; intuitions
without concepts are
blind only from their
union can cognition arise.
Immanuel Kant

For example, the experimental
physicist Galileo Galilei wanted to
test the hypothesis that two things
of different weights will nevertheless
fall through the air at the same rate.
He designed an experiment to test
this in such a way that the only
possible explanation of the observed
result would be the truth or falsity
of the hypothesis.
Kant identies the nature and
importance of the scientic method.
He believes that this method had
put physics and other subjects on
the secure road of a science.
However, his investigations do not
stop there. His next question is:
Why is our experience of the world
such that the scientic method
works? In other words, why is our
experience of the world always
mathematical in nature, and how
is it always possible for human
reason to put questions to nature?

These direct acquaintances he
calls intuitions. Second is what
Kant calls the understanding, our
ability to have and use concepts.
For Kant, a concept is an indirect
acquaintance with things as
examples of a type of thing, such
as the concept of book in general.
Without concepts we would not
know our intuition was of a book;
without intuitions we would never
know that there were books at all.
Each of these elements has, in
turn, two sides. In sensibility, there
is my intuition of a particular thing
in space and time (like the book)
and my intuition of space and time
as such (my acquaintance with
what space and time are like in
general). In understanding, there is

my concept of some type of thing
(books) and my concept of a thing
as such (substance). A concept
such as substance denes what
it means to be a thing in general
rather than dening some type
of thing like a book. My intuition
of a book and the concept of a book
are empirical, for how could I know
anything about books unless I had
come across them in the world?
But my intuition of space and time
and the concept of substance are
a priori, meaning that they are
known before or independently
of any experience.
A true empiricist would argue
against Kant that all acquaintances
come from experiencein other
words, nothing is a priori. They

Kant split knowledge into intuitions, gained
from direct sensibility of the world, and concepts,
which come indirectly from our understanding.
Some of our knowledgeboth of sensibility and
understandingcomes from empirical evidence,
while some is known a priori.
the concept book

intuition of a
particular book

Intuitions and concepts
In his most famous work, Critique
of Pure Reason, Kant argues that
our experience of the world involves
two elements. The rst is what he
calls sensibilityour ability to be
directly acquainted with particular
things in space and time, such as
this book you are reading now.

intuition of
space and time

the concept of substance

Key
Empirical
knowledge
A priori
knowledge

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 169

Our understanding that entities such
as trees undergo change presupposes an
a priori grasp of the concept substance,
according to Kant. Such concepts are
the preconditions of our experience.

might say that we learn what space
is by observing things in space; and
we learn what substance is from
our observation that the features
of things change without the
underlying thing itself changing.
For instance, though a trees leaves
turn from green to brown, and
eventually fall from the tree, it is
still the same tree.

Space and substance
Kants arguments show that, on
the contrary, space is an a priori
intuition. In order to learn about
things outside of me, I need to
know that they are outside of me.
But that shows that I could not
learn about space in this way: how
can I locate something outside of
me without already knowing what
outside of me means? Some
knowledge of space has to be
assumed before I can ever study
space empirically. We must be
familiar with space a priori.
This argument has an
extraordinary consequence.
Because space itself is a priori, it
does not belong to things in the
world. But our experience of things
in space is a feature of our

sensibility. A thing-in-itselfKants
term for a thing that is considered
separately from sensibility, and
therefore exterior to our minds
may have nothing to do with space.
Kant used similar arguments to
prove the same thing of time.
Kant then turns to proving the
existence of a priori concepts, such
as substance. He asks us rst to
distinguish between two types of
alteration: variation and change.
Variation concerns the properties
that things have: for instance, a
trees leaves may be green or
brown. Change is what the tree
does: the same tree changes its
leaves from green to brown. To
make this distinction is already to
use the notion of substance: the
tree (as substance) changes, but
the leaves (as the properties of
substance) vary. If we do not accept
this distinction, then we cannot
accept the validity of the concept
of substance. We would be saying
that any time there is alteration,
something pops into or out of
existence; the tree with green
leaves is annihilated at the same
time that the tree with brown
leaves begins to exist from nothing.
Kant needs to prove that such a
view is impossible. The key to this
is time determination. Time cannot
be directly experienced (it is not a
thing); rather, we experience time
through things that alter or do not
alter, as Kant has already shown. If
we experienced time through the
tree with green leaves and also
experienced time through the tree
with brown leaves without there
being any connection between the
two, then we would be experiencing
two separate real times. Since this
is absurd, Kant believes he has
demonstrated that the concept of
substance is absolutely essential
before we can gain any experience
of the world. And, since it is

through that experience that we
learn anything empirical, the
concept of substance could not
be empirical: it is rather a priori.

The limits of knowledge
A philosophical position that
asserts that some state or activity
of the mind is prior to and more
fundamental than things we
experience is called idealism,
and Kant calls his own position
transcendental idealism. He
insists that space, time, and
certain concepts are features of
the world we experience (what
Kant called the phenomenal world)
rather than features of the world
itself considered separately from
experience (what Kant called the
noumenal world).
Kants claims about a priori
knowledge have both positive
and negative consequences. The
positive consequence is that the
a priori nature of space, time, and
certain concepts is what makes our
experience of the world possible
and reliable. Space and time make
our experience mathematical in
nature; we can measure it against
known values. A priori concepts
such as substance make it possible
to address questions about nature
such as Is that a substance? and
What properties does it exhibit 

Only from the
human standpoint can
we speak of space.
Immanuel Kant

170 IMMANUEL KANT
and according to what laws? In
other words, Kants transcendental
idealism is what makes it possible
for our experience to be considered
useful to science.
On the negative side, certain
types of thinking call themselves
science and even resemble science,
but fail utterly. This is because
they apply to things-in-themselves
intuitions about space and time,
or concepts such as substance
which according to Kant must be
valid for experience, but have no
validity with respect to things-inthemselves. Because they resemble
science, these types of thinking are
a constant temptation to us, and
are a trap that many fall into
without realizing it. For example,
we might wish to claim that God is
the cause of the world, but cause
and effect is another of the a priori
concepts, like substance, that Kant
believes is entirely valid for our
experienced world, but not for

Human reason is
troubled by questions that
it cannot dismiss, but
also cannot answer.
Immanuel Kant

things-in-themselves. So the
existence of God (considered, as it
usually is, as a being independent
of the experienced world) is not
something that could be known.
The negative consequence of
Kant's philosophy, then, is to place
quite severe restrictions on the
limits of knowledge.

Reason only has insight
into that which it
produces after a plan
of its own.
Immanuel Kant

Transcendental idealism gives
us a much more radical way of
understanding the distinction
between ourselves and the external
world. What is external to me is
interpreted as not just external to
me in space, but external to space
itself (and to time, and to all the
a priori concepts that make my
experience of the world possible).
And there are two worlds: the
world of experience, which
includes both my thoughts and
feelings, and also includes
experience of material things such
as my body, or books; and the
world of things-in-themselves,
which is precisely not experienced
and so not in any sense known, and
which we must constantly strive to
avoid fooling ourselves about.
Our bodies have a curious role
to play in all this. On the one hand,
my body as a material thing is a
part of the external world. On the
other hand, the body is a part of us,
and indeed is the medium through
which we encounter other things
The Flammarion woodcut depicts a
man looking outside of space and time.
For Kant, what is external to us is
external to space and time also, and
can never be known as a thing-in-itself.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 171
Rationalism
The rationalists believed that
the use of reason, rather than
experience, leads to knowledge
of objects in the world.

Empiricism
The empiricists believed that
knowledge comes from our
experience of objects in the
world, rather than our reason.

Immanuel Kant
Transcendental Idealism
Kants theory of transcendental
idealism stated that both reason
and experience were necessary
to understand the world.

(using our skin, nerves, eyes, ears,
and so on). This provides us with
one way of understanding the
distinction between bodies and
the external world: the body as
the medium of my sensations is
different from other external and
material things.

Lasting inuence
Kants book Critique of Pure Reason
is arguably the most signicant
single work in the history of
modern philosophy. Indeed, the
whole subject of philosophy is often
divided by many modern thinkers
into everything that happened
before Kant, and everything that
has happened since.
Before Kant, empiricists such as
John Locke emphasized what Kant
termed sensibility, but rationalists
such as Descartes tended to
emphasize understanding. Kant
argues that our experience of the
world always involves both, so it is
frequently said that Kant combined
rationalism and empiricism.

After Kant, German philosophy in
particular progressed rapidly. The
idealists Johann Fichte, Friedrich
Schelling, and Georg Hegel all took
Kants thought in new directions
and, in their turn, inuenced the
whole of 19th-century thought,
from romanticism to Marxism.
Kant's sophisticated critique of
metaphysical thought was also
important in positivism, which
held that every justiable assertion
is capable of being scientically
or logically veried.
The fact that Kant locates the
a priori even within our intuitions
of the world was important for
20th-century phenomenologists
such as Edmund Husserl and
Martin Heidegger, who sought to
examine objects of experience
independently of any assumptions
we may have about them. Kants
work also remains an important
reference point for contemporary
philosophers today, especially
in the branches of metaphysics
and epistemology. 

Immanuel Kant was born into a
family of nancially struggling
artisans in 1724, and he lived
and worked his whole life in
the cosmopolitan Baltic port
city of Konigsberg, then part
of Prussia. Though he never
left his native province, he
became an internationally
famous philosopher within
his own lifetime.
Kant studied philosophy,
physics, and mathematics at
the University of Konigsberg,
and taught at the same
institution for the next 27
years. In 1792 his unorthodox
views led King Friedrich
Wilhelm II to ban him from
teaching, to which he returned
after the kings death ve
years later. Kant published
throughout his career, but is
best known for the series of
ground-breaking works he
produced in his 50s and 60s.
Though a bright and sociable
man, he never married, and
died at the age of 80.
Key works
1781 Critique of Pure Reason
1785 Foundations of the
Metaphysics of Morals
1788 Critique of Practical
Reason
1790 Critique of Judgement

172

SOCIETY
IS INDEED
A CONTRACT
EDMUND BURKE (17291797)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Conservatism
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Aristotle argues that
society is like an organism,
and that man is by nature a
political animal.
5th century St. Augustine of
Hippo argues that government
is a form of punishment for
original sin.
17th century Thomas Hobbes
and John Locke develop the
idea of the social contract.
AFTER
19th century French
philosopher Joseph de Maistre
points out the antidemocratic
legacy of Burke since the
French Revolution.
20th century British
philosopher Michael Oakeshott
develops a more liberal form
of conservatism.

M

any a disaffected person
cries Its not my fault...
blame society! But the
meaning of the word society is
not entirely clear, and it has changed
over time. During the 18th century,
when the Irish philosopher and
statesman Edmund Burke was
writing, Europe was becoming
increasingly commercialized, and

the idea that society is a mutual
agreement between its members
like a commercial companywas
readily understood. However, this
point of view also implies that it
is only the material things in life
that matter. Burke attempts to
redress the balance by reminding
us that human beings also enrich
their lives through science, art,

Human beings have
material, scientic,
artistic, and moral needs.

They cannot meet all these
needs through their own efforts.

They refer to the
customs and religion
of their ancestors
wherever possible.

They agree to help
each other since this
is the best way to meet
their mutual needs.

Society is indeed
a contract.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 173
See also: John Locke 13033  David Hume 14853
15459  Adam Smith 16063  John Rawls 29495

and virtue, and that while society
is indeed a contract or partnership,
it is not simply concerned with
economics, or, as he puts it, gross
animal existence. Society embodies
the common good (our agreement
on customs, norms, and values), but
for Burke society means more
than just the people living now
it also includes our ancestors and
descendants. Moreover, because
every political constitution is part
of the great primeval contract of
eternal society, God himself is
societys ultimate guarantor.
Burkes view has the doctrine
of original sin (the idea that we are
born sinful) at its core, so he has
little sympathy for anyone seeking
to blame society for their conduct.
Likewise, he dismisses the idea,
proposed by John Locke, that we
can be perfected by educationas
though we are born innocent and
merely need to be given the correct
inuences. For Burke, the fallibility
of individual judgment is why we
need tradition, to give us the moral
bearings we needan argument
that echoes David Hume, who
claimed that custom is the great
guide to human life.



Jean-Jacques Rousseau

Jacques Rousseau, whose book,
The Social Contract, argued that
the contract between citizens and
the state can be broken at any time,
depending on the will of the people.
Another regular target for Burke
was the English philosopher and
scientist Joseph Priestley, who
applauded the French Revolution
and pilloried the idea of original sin.
Despite his scepticism about
modern commercial society, Burke
was a great defender of private
property, and was optimistic about
the free market. For this reason, he is
often hailed as the father of modern
conservatisma philosophy that
values both economic freedom and
tradition. Today, even socialists
would agree with Burke that private
property is a fundamental social
institution, but would disagree
with him about its value. Likewise,
ecologically-minded philosophers
share his belief in the duties of one
generation to the next, but with
the new agenda of creating a
sustainable society. 

Tradition and change
Because society is an organic
structure with roots stretching
deep into the past, Burke believed
its political organization should
develop naturally over time. He
opposed the idea of sweeping or
abrupt political changes that cut
through this natural process. For
this reason he opposed the French
Revolution of 1789, foreseeing its
dangers long before the execution
of the king and the year-long Reign
of Terror. It also prompted him on
several occasions to criticize Jean-

Edmund Burke
The Anglo-Irish politician
Edmund Burke was born
and educated in Dublin. From
his youth onward, he was
convinced that philosophy
was useful training for
politics, and in the 1750s
he wrote notable essays on
aesthetics and the origins
of society. He served as an
English MP from 1766 until
1794, and he was a prominent
member of the Whig party
the more liberal of the two
aristocratic parties of the day.
Burke was sympathetic
toward the cause of American
independencewhich sparked
a revolution that was entirely
justied, in his viewand
later became involved in the
impeachment trial of Warren
Hastings, the GovernorGeneral of India. He remained
a scathing critic of colonial
malpractice for the rest of his
life, and earned a reputation
for being the conscience of
the British Empire.
Key works

Burke condemned the French
Revolution for its wholesale rejection
of the past. He believed that change
should occur graduallyan idea that
became central to modern conservatism.

1756 A Vindication of Natural
Society
1770 Thoughts on the Present
Discontents
1790 Reections on the
Revolution in France

174

THE GREATEST
HAPPINESS FOR THE
GREATEST
NUMBER
JEREMY BENTHAM (17481832)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Utilitarianism
BEFORE
Late 4th century BCE
Epicurus states that the main
goal of life should be the
pursuit of happiness.
Early 17th century Thomas
Hobbes argues that a strong
legal system, with severe
penalties for criminals, leads
to a stable and happier society.
Mid-18th century David
Hume claims that emotion
governs our moral judgement.
AFTER
Mid-19th century John
Stuart Mill advocates education
for all, arguing that it would
improve general happiness.
Late 19th century Henry
Sidgwick says that how moral
an action is equates directly to
the degree of pleasure it brings.

J

eremy Bentham, a legal
reformer and philosopher,
was convinced that all
human activity was driven by
only two motivating forcesthe
avoidance of pain and the pursuit
of pleasure. In The Principles of
Morals and Legislation (1789), he
argues that all social and political
decisions should be made with
the aim of achieving the greatest
happiness for the greatest number
of people. Bentham believes that
the moral worth of such decisions
relates directly to their utility, or
efciency, in generating happiness
or pleasure. In a society driven by
this utilitarian approach, he
claims that conicts of interest
between individuals can be settled
by legislators, guided solely by the
principle of creating the broadest
possible spread of contentment. If
everyone can be made happy, so
much the better, but if a choice is
necessary, it is always preferable
to favor the many over the few.
One of the main benets of his
proposed system, Bentham states,
is its simplicity. By adopting his

ideas, you avoid the confusions and
misinterpretations of more complex
political systems that can often
lead to injustices and grievances.

Calculating pleasure
More controversially, Bentham
proposes a felicic calculus that
can express mathematically the
degree of happiness experienced
by each individual. Using this
precise method, he states, provides
an objective platform for resolving
ethical disputes, with decisions
being made in favor of the view
that is calculated to produce the
highest measure of pleasure.
Bentham also insists that all
sources of pleasure are of equal
value, so that the happiness derived
from a good meal or close friendship
is equal to that derived from an
activity that may require effort or
education, such as engaging in
philosophical debate or reading
poetry. This means that Bentham
assumes a fundamental human
equality, with complete happiness
being accessible to all, regardless
of social class or ability. 

See also: Epicurus 6465  Thomas Hobbes 11215
John Stuart Mill 19093  Henry Sidgwick 336



David Hume 14853



THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 175

MIND HAS
NO GENDER

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT (17591797)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Feminism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Plato advises
that girls should have a similar
education to boys.
4th century CE Hypatia, a
noted female mathematician
and philosopher, teaches in
Alexandria, Egypt.
1790 In Letters on Education,
British historian Catherine
Macaulay claims the apparent
weakness of women is caused
by their miseducation.
AFTER
1869 John Stuart Mills The
Subjection of Women argues
for equality of the sexes.
Late 20th century A surge of
feminist activism begins to
overturn most of the social and
political inequalities between
the sexes in Western society.

F

or most of recorded history,
women have been seen as
subordinate to men. But
during the 18th century, the justice
of this arrangement began to be
openly challenged. Among the
most prominent voices of dissent
was that of the English radical
Mary Wollstonecraft.
Many previous thinkers had
cited the physical differences
between the sexes to justify the
social inequality between women
and men. However, in the light of
new ideas that had been formulated
during the 17th century, such as
John Lockes view that nearly all
knowledge was acquired through
experience and education, the
validity of such reasoning was
being called into question.

Equal education
Wollstonecraft argues that if men
and women are given the same
education they will acquire the
same good character and rational
approach to life, because they have
fundamentally similar brains and
minds. Her book, A Vindication of

the Rights of Woman, published
in 1792, was partly a response to
Jean-Jacques Rousseaus Emile
(1762), which recommends that girls
be educated differently to boys, and
that they learn deference to them.
Wollstonecrafts demand that
women be treated as equal citizens
to menwith equal legal, social,
and political rightswas still
largely treated with derision in the
late 18th century. But it did sow the
seeds of the suffragette and feminist
movements that were to ourish in
the 19th and 20th centuries. 

Let woman share
the rights and she will
emulate the virtues of man.
Mary Wollstonecraft

See also: Plato 5055  Hypatia of Alexandria 331  John Stuart Mill 19093
Simone de Beauvoir 27677  Luce Irigaray 320  Hlne Cixous 322



176

WHAT SORT OF PHILOSOPHY
ONE CHOOSES DEPENDS
ON WHAT SORT OF
PERSON ONE IS
JOHANN GOTTLIEB FICHTE (17621814)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Idealism
BEFORE
1641 Ren Descartes discovers
that it is impossible to doubt
that I exist. The self is
therefore the one and only
thing of which we can be sure.
18th century Immanuel
Kant develops a philosophy of
idealism and the transcendental
ego, the I that synthesizes
information. This forms the
basis of Fichtes idealism and
notion of the self.
AFTER
20th century Fichtes
nationalist ideas become
associated with Martin
Heidegger and the Nazi
regime in Germany.
1950S Isaiah Berlin holds
Fichtes idea of true freedom
of the self as responsible for
modern authoritarianism.

J

ohann Gottlieb Fichte was
an 18th-century German
philosopher and student of
Immanuel Kant. He examined how
it is possible for us to exist as
ethical beings with free will, while
living in a world that appears to be
causally determined; that is to say,
in a world where every event follows
on necessarily from previous events
and conditions, according to
unvarying laws of nature.
The idea that there is a world
like this out there, beyond our
selves and independent of us, is
known as dogmatism. This is an
idea that gained ground in the
Enlightenment period, but Fichte
thinks that it leaves no room for
moral values or choice. How can
people be considered to have free
will, he asks, if everything is
determined by something else
that exists outside of ourselves?
Fichte argues instead for a
version of idealism similar to Kants,
in which our own minds create all
that we think of as reality. In this
idealist world, the self is an active
entity or essence that exists

outside of causal inuences, and
is able to think and choose freely,
independently, and spontaneously.
Fichte understands idealism and
dogmatism to be entirely different
starting points. They can never be
mixed into one philosophical
system, he says; there is no way of
proving philosophically which is
correct, and neither can be used to
refute the other. For this reason one
can only choose which philosophy
one believes in, not for objective,
rational reasons, but depending
upon what sort of person one is. 

Think the I,
and observe what is
involved in doing this.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte

See also: Ren Descartes 11623  Benedictus Spinoza 12629 
Immanuel Kant 16471  Martin Heidegger 25255  Isaiah Berlin 28081

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 177

ABOUT NO SUBJECT
IS THERE LESS
PHILOSOPHIZING THAN
ABOUT PHILOSOPHY
FRIEDRICH SCHLEGEL (1772-1829)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphilosophy
APPROACH
Reexivity
BEFORE
C.450 BCE

Protagoras says that
there are no rst principles
or absolute truths; man is
the measure of all things.
1641 Ren Descartes claims
to have found a rst principle
on which to build beliefs about
existence when he states that
I think, therefore I am.
AFTER
1830 Georg Hegel says that
the whole of philosophy
resembles a circle of circles.
1920S Martin Heidegger
argues that philosophy is a
matter of our relationship with
our own existence.
1967 Jacques Derrida claims
that philosophical analysis can
only be made at the level of
language and texts.

T

he German historian and
poet, Friedrich Schlegel,
is generally credited with
introducing the use of aphorisms
(short, ambiguous sayings) into
later modern philosophy. In 1798
he observed that there was little
philosophizing about philosophy
(metaphilosophy), implying that we
should question both how Western
philosophy functions and its
assumption that a linear type of
argument is the best approach.
Schlegel disagrees with the
approaches of Aristotle and Ren
Descartes, saying they are wrong
to assume that there are solid rst
principles that can form a starting
point. He also thinks that it is not
possible to reach any nal answers,
because every conclusion of an
argument can be endlessly perfected.
Describing his own approach,
Schlegel says philosophy must
always start in the middle it is a
whole, and the path to recognizing
it is no straight line but a circle.
Schlegels holistic viewseeing
philosophy as a wholets within
the broader context of his Romantic

theories about art and life. These
value individual human emotion
above rational thought, in contrast
to most Enlightenment thinking.
While his charge against earlier
philosophy was not necessarily
correct his contemporary, Georg
Hegel, took up the cause for
reexivitythe modern name for
applying philosophical methods to
the subject of philosophy itself. 

Philosophy is the art of thinking, and
Schlegel points out that its methods
affect the kind of answers it can nd.
Western and Eastern philosophies use
very different approaches.

See also: Protagoras 4243  Aristotle 5663  Ren Descartes 11623 
Georg Hegel 17885  Martin Heidegger 25255  Jacques Derrida 30813

REALITY
IS A HISTORICAL

PROCESS
GEORG HEGEL (17701831)

180 GEORG HEGEL
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Idealism
BEFORE
6th century BCE Heraclitus
claims that all things pass into
their opposites, an important
factor in Hegels dialectic.
1781 Immanuel Kant publishes
his Critique of Pure Reason,
which shows the limits of
human knowledge.
1790s The works of Johann
Fichte and Friedrich Schelling
lay the foundations for the
school of German Idealism.
AFTER
1846 Karl Marx writes The
German Ideology, which uses
Hegels dialectical method.
1943 Jean-Paul Sartres
existentialist work Being and
Nothingness relies upon
Hegels notion of the dialectic.

Georg Hegel

H

egel was the single most
famous philosopher in
Germany during the rst
half of the 19th century. His central
idea was that all phenomena,
from consciousness to political
institutions, are aspects of a single
Spirit (by which he means mind or
idea) that over the course of time
is reintegrating these aspects into
itself. This process of reintegration
is what Hegel calls the dialectic,
and it is one that we (who are all
aspects of Spirit) understand as
history. Hegel is therefore a
monist, for he believes that all
things are aspects of a single thing,
and an idealist, for he believes that
reality is ultimately something
that is not material (in this case
Spirit). Hegels idea radically
altered the philosophical landscape,
and to fully grasp its implications
we need to take a look at the
background to his thought.

History and consciousness
Few philosophers would deny that
human beings are, to a great
extent, historicalthat we inherit
things from the past, change them,
and then pass them on to future
generations. Language, for example,
Georg Hegel was born in 1770 in
Stuttgart, Germany, and studied
theology at Tbingen where he
met and became friends with the
poet Friedrich Hlderlin and the
philosopher Friedrich Schelling.
He spent several years working
as a tutor before an inheritance
allowed him to join Schelling at
the University of Jena. Hegel
was forced to leave Jena when
Napoleons troops occupied the
town, and just managed to rescue
his major work, Phenomenology
of Spirit, which catapulted him to
a dominant position in German
philosophy. In need of funds, he

Certain changes, such those brought
about by the American Revolution,
are explained by Hegel as the progress
of Spirit from a lesser stage of its
development to a higher stage.

is something that we learn and
change as we use it, and the same
is true of sciencescientists start
with a body of theory, and then go
on either to conrm or to disconrm
it. The same is also true of social
institutions, such as the family, the
state, banks, churches, and so on
most of which are modied forms
of earlier practices or institutions.
became a newspaper editor and
then a school headmaster before
being appointed to the chair of
philosophy rst in Heidelberg
and then at the prestigious
University of Berlin. At the age
of 41 he married Marie von
Tucher, with whom he had
three children. Hegel died in
1831 during a cholera epidemic.
Key works
1807 Phenomenology of Spirit
181216 Science of Logic
1817 Encyclopedia of the
Philosophical Sciences

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 181
See also: Heraclitus 40  Johann Gottlieb Fichte 176
Karl Marx 196203  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

Human beings, therefore, never
begin their existence from scratch,
but always within some kind of
contexta context that changes,
sometimes radically within a single
generation. Some things, however,
do not immediately appear to be
historical, or subject to change.
An example of such a thing is
consciousness. We know for certain
that what we are conscious of will
change, but what it means to be
consciouswhat kind of a thing it
is to be awake, to be aware, to be
capable of thinking and making
decisionsis something that we
tend to believe has always been
the same for everyone. Likewise,
it seems plausible to claim that
the structures of thought are not
historicalthat the kind of activity
that thinking is, and what mental
faculties it relies on (memory,
perception, understanding, and so
on), has always been the same for
everyone throughout history. This
was certainly what Hegels great
idealist predecessor, Immanuel
Kant, believedand to understand
Hegel, we need to know what he
thought about Kants work.

Kants categories
For Kant, the basic ways in which
thought works, and the basic
structures of consciousness, are a
priorithat is, they exist prior to
(and so are not are not derived from)
experience. This means that they
are independent not only of what we
are thinking about, or are conscious
of, but are independent of any
historical inuence or development.
Kant calls these structures
of thought categories, and these
include the concepts cause,
substance, existence, and
reality. For example, experience



Friedrich Schelling 335



may give us knowledge about the
outside world, but nothing within
experience itself teaches us that
the outside world actually contains,
for example, causes and effects.
For Kant, knowledge of the basic
structure of the outside world is a
priori knowledge. It is only possible
because we are all born with
categories that supply us with a
framework for experiencepart of
which is the assumption that there
is an external world. However, Kant
continues, this a priori framework
means that the world as it appears 

Arthur Schopenhauer 18688



To comprehend what is
is the task of philosophy,
for what is, is reason.
Georg Hegel

Philosophy must begin
by making no assumptions.

We must not assume
that the structures of
thought and consciousness
never change.

We must not assume that
the whole of reality is divided
into thoughts and the
objects of thought.

These structures themselves
are aspects of spirit.

Thoughts and objects are
both aspects of spirit.

All reality is spirit, and
all spirit undergoes
historical development.

All reality is a
historical process.

182 GEORG HEGEL
Hegels dialectic shows how opposites nd resolution.
A state of tyranny, for example, generates a need for
freedombut once freedom has been achieved there
can only be anarchy until an element of tyranny is
combined with freedom, creating the synthesis law.

THESIS

ANTITHESIS

TYRANNY

FREEDOM

they are dialecticalmeaning
that they are always subject to
change. Where Kant believes in
an unchanging framework of
experience, Hegel believes that
the framework of experience itself
is subject to changeas much,
indeed, as the world that we
experience. Consciousness,
therefore, and not merely what
we are conscious of, is part of an
evolving process. This process is
dialecticala concept that has a
very specic meaning in Hegels
philosophical thought.

Hegels dialectic

LAW

SYNTHESIS
is dependent upon the nature of
the human mind, and does not
represent the world as it really is
in other words, the world as it is in
itself. This world as it is in itself
is what Kant calls the noumenal
world, and he claims that it is
unknowable. All that we can
know, according to Kant, is the
world as it appears to us through
the framework of the categories
and this is what Kant calls the
phenomenal world, or the world
of our everyday experience.

Hegels critique of Kant
Hegel believes that Kant made
great strides forward in eliminating
naivety in philosophy, but that his
accounts of the world in itself
and the categories still betray
uncritical assumptions. Hegel
argues that Kant fails in at least

two respects to be sufciently
thorough in his analysis. First of
all, Hegel regards Kants notion of
the world in itself as an empty
abstraction that means nothing.
For Hegel, what exists is whatever
comes to be manifested in
consciousnessfor example, as
something sensed or as something
thought. Kants second failure, Hegel
argues, is that he makes too many
assumptions about the nature and
origin of the categories.
Hegels task is to understand
these categories without making
any assumptions whatsoever,
and the worst assumption that
Hegel sees in Kant concerns the
relationships of the categories to
each other. Kant assumes that the
categories are original and distinct,
and that they are totally separate
from each otherbut for Hegel

The notion of dialectic is central
to what Hegel calls his immanent
(internal) account of the development
of things. He declares that his
account will guarantee four things.
First, that no assumptions are made.
Second, that only the broadest
notions possible are employed, the
better to avoid asserting anything
without justication. Third, that it
shows how a general notion gives
rise to other, more specic, notions.
Fourth, that this process happens
entirely from within the notion
itself. This fourth requirement
reveals the core of Hegels logic
namely that every notion, or
thesis, contains within itself a
contradiction, or antithesis, which
is only resolved by the emergence
of a newer, richer notion, called a
synthesis, from the original notion
itself. One consequence of this
immanent process is that when we
become aware of the synthesis,
we realize that what we saw as the
earlier contradiction in the thesis
was only an apparent contradiction,
one that was caused by some
limitation in our understanding
of the original notion.
An example of this logical
progression appears at the
beginning of Hegels Science of

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 183

Each of the parts of
philosophy is a philosophical
whole, a circle rounded and
complete in itself.
Georg Hegel

Logic, where he introduces the
most general and all-inclusive
notion of pure beingmeaning
anything that in any sense could be
said to be. He then shows that this
concept contains a contradiction
namely, that it requires the opposite
concept of nothingness or notbeing for it to be fully understood.
Hegel then shows that this
contradiction is simply a conict

between two aspects of a single,
higher concept in which they nd
resolution. In the case of being
and not-being, the concept that
resolves them is becoming. When
we say that something becomes,
we mean that it moves from a state
of not-being to a state of beingso
it turns out that the concept of
being that we started off with
was not really a single concept at
all, but merely one aspect of the
three-part notion of becoming.
The vital point here is that the
concept of becoming is not
introduced from outside, as it
were, to resolve the contradiction
between being and not-being.
On the contrary, Hegels analysis
shows that becoming was always
the meaning of being and notbeing, and that all we had to do
was analyze these concepts to see
their underlying logic.
This resolution of a thesis (being)
with its antithesis (not-being) in a
synthesis (becoming) is just the

beginning of the dialectical process,
which goes on to repeat itself at
a higher level. That is, any new
synthesis turns out, on further
analysis, to involve its own
contradiction, and this in turn
is overcome by a still richer or
higher notion. All ideas, according
to Hegel, are interconnected in this
way, and the process of revealing
those connections is what Hegel
calls his dialectical method.
In saying that the structures of
thought are dialectical, therefore,
Hegel means that they are not
distinct and irreducible, as Kant
maintained, but that they emerge
from the broadest, emptiest notions
by means of this movement of selfcontradiction and resolution.

Dialectic and the world
The discussion of Hegels dialectic
above uses terms such as emerge,
development, and movement.
On the one hand, these terms
reect something important 

In Hegels view, a synthesis emerging from
an antagonism of thesis and antithesis itself
becomes a new thesis, which generates its
own antithesiswhich nally gives birth
to another synthesis. This dialectical
process is one in which Spirit comes to
ever more accurate understandings
of itselfculminating in
the philosophy of Hegel,
in which it achieves
complete understanding.

T1

A1

S1 / T2
KEY
T = THESIS
A = ANTITHESIS
S = SYNTHESIS

A2

A3

S2 / T3

S3 / T4

184 GEORG HEGEL
about this method of philosophy
that it starts without assumptions
and from the least controversial
point, and allows ever richer and
truer concepts to reveal themselves
through the process of dialectical
unfolding. On the other hand,
however, Hegel clearly argues that
these developments are not simply
interesting facts of logic, but are real
developments that can be seen at
work in history. For example, a man
from ancient Greece and a man
living in the modern world will
obviously think about different
things, but Hegel claims that their
very ways of thinking are different,
and represent different kinds of
consciousnessor different stages
in the historical development of
thought and consciousness.
Hegels rst major work,
Phenomenology of Spirit, gives
an account of the dialectical

development of these forms of
consciousness. He starts with the
types of consciousness that an
individual human being might
possess, and works up to collective
forms of consciousness. He does so
in such a way as to show that these
types of consciousness are to be
found externalized in particular
historical periods or eventsmost
famously, for example, in the
American and French revolutions.
Indeed, Hegel even argues that
at certain times in history, Spirits
next revolutionary change may
manifest itself as an individual
(such as Napoleon Bonaparte) who,
as an individual consciousness, is
completely unaware of his or her
role in the history of Spirit. And the
progress that these individuals
make is always characterized by
the freeing of aspects of Spirit (in
human form) from recurring states

Each stage of
world-history is a necessary
moment in the Idea of
the World Spirit.
Georg Hegel

of oppression of overcoming
tyrannies that may themselves be
the result of the overcoming of
previous tyrannies.
This extraordinary ideathat
the nature of consciousness has
changed through time, and changed
in accordance with a pattern that is
visible in historymeans that
there is nothing about human
beings that is not historical in
character. Moreover, this historical
development of consciousness
cannot simply have happened at
random. Since it is a dialectical
process, it must in some sense
contain both a particular sense of
direction and an end point. Hegel
calls this end point Absolute
Spiritand by this he means a
future stage of consciousness
which no longer even belongs to
individuals, but which instead
belongs to reality as a whole.
At this point in its development,
knowledge is completeas it must
be, according to Hegel, since Spirit
encompasses, through dialectical
Napoleon Bonaparte, according to
Hegel, perfectly embodied the zeitgeist
(spirit of the age) and was able, through
his actions, to move history into the
next stage of its development.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 185

Of the Absolute it must
be said that it is essentially
a result, that only in the
end is it what it truly is.
Georg Hegel

synthesis, both the knower and
what is known. Furthermore, Spirit
grasps this knowledge as nothing
other than its own completed
essencethe full assimilation of
all forms of otherness that were
always parts of itself, however
unknowingly. In other words, Spirit
does not simply come to encompass
realityit comes to be aware of
itself as having always been nothing
other than the movement toward
this encompassing of reality. As
Hegel writes in The Phenomenology
of Spirit, History is a conscious,
self-mediating process[it is]
Spirit emptied out into time.

Spirit and nature
But what about the world in which
we live, and which seems to go its
way quite separately from human
history? What does it mean to say
that reality itself is historical?
According to Hegel, what we
ordinarily call nature or the world
is also Spirit. Nature is to be
regarded as a system of stages, he
writes, one arising necessarily from
the other and being the proximate
truth of the stage from which it
results. He goes on to claim that
one of the stages of nature is the
progression from that which is

only Life (nature as a living whole)
to that which has existence as
Spirit (the whole of nature now
revealed as always having been,
when properly understood, Spirit).
At this stage of nature, a different
dialectic begins, namely that of
consciousness itselfof the forms
that Absolute Spirit takes in its
dialectical progression toward selfrealization. Hegels account
of this progression begins with
consciousness rst thinking of
itself as an individual thing among
other individuals, and occupying a
separate space to that of matter or
the natural world. Later stages of
consciousness, however, are no
longer those of individuals, but are
those of social or political groups
and so the dialectic continues,
rening itself until it reaches the
stage of Absolute Spirit.

only one realitythat of Spirit,
which knows and reects on
itself, and is both thought and
what is thought about.
The Whole of Spirit, or
Absolute Spirit, is the end point
of Hegels dialectic. However,
the preceding stages are not left
behind, as it were, but are revealed
as insufciently analyzed aspects
of Spirit as a whole. Indeed, what
we think of as an individual person
is not a separate constituent of
reality, but is an aspect of how
Spirit developsor how it empties
itself out into time. Thus, Hegel
writes, The True is the Whole.
But the Whole is nothing other
than the essence consummating
itself through its development.
Reality is Spiritboth thought
and what is known by thought
and undergoes a process of
historical development. 

Spirit and mind
At the time Hegel was writing,
there was a dominant philosophical
view that there are two kinds of
entities in the worldthings that
exist in the physical world and
thoughts about those things
these latter being something like
pictures or images of the things.
Hegel argues that all versions of
this distinction are mistakes, and
involve committing ourselves to the
ridiculous scenario in which two
things are both absolutely different
(things and thoughts), but also
somehow similar (because the
thoughts are images of things).
Hegel argues that it only seems
as though the objects of thought are
different from thought itself. For
Hegel, the illusion of difference and
separation between these two
apparent worlds is shown as such
when both thought and nature are
revealed as aspects of Spirit. This
illusion is overcome in Absolute
Spirit, when we see that there is

German history had reached its end
point in the Prussian state, according
to Hegel. However, there was a strong
feeling in favor of a united Germany, as
personied by the gure of Germania.

186

EVERY MAN TAKES
THE LIMITS OF
HIS OWN FIELD
OF VISION FOR
THE LIMITS OF
THE WORLD

ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER (17881860)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics
APPROACH
Idealism
BEFORE
1690 John Locke publishes
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, explaining
how all our knowledge comes
from experience.
1781 Immanuel Kants Critique
of Pure Reason introduces the
concept of a thing in itself,
which Schopenhauer used as
a starting point for his ideas.
AFTER
Late 19th century Friedrich
Nietzsche puts forward the
notion of a Will to power to
explain human motivations.
Early 20th century Austrian
psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
explores what lies behind our
basic human urges.

A

rthur Schopenhauer was not
part of the mainstream of
early 19th-century German
philosophy. He acknowledged
Immanuel Kant, whom he idolized,
as a major inuence, but dismissed
the idealists of his own generation,
who held that reality ultimately
consists of something nonmaterial.
Most of all he detested the idealist
Georg Hegel for his dry writing
style and optimistic philosophy.
Using Kants metaphysics as
his starting point, Schopenhauer
developed his own view of the
world, which he expressed in clear,
literary language. He took Kants
view that the world is divided into
what we perceive through our

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 187
See also: Empedocles 330  John Locke 13033  Immanuel Kant 16471
Georg Hegel 17885  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421



My version of the world
is limited by

the limited
observations I can
make of a vast universe.

my limited
experience of a vast
universal Will, of which
my will is just a part.

My version of the world does
not include things I have
not perceived, nor the universal
Will I have not experienced.

I take the limits of my own eld of
vision for the limits of the world.

senses (phenomena), and things in
themselves (noumena), but he
wanted to explain the nature of the
phenomenal and noumenal worlds.

Interpreting Kant
According to Kant, we each
construct a version of the world
from our perceptionsthe
phenomenal worldbut we can
never experience the noumenal
world as it is in itself. So we each
have a limited vision of the world,
as our perceptions are built from
information acquired through a
limited set of senses. Schopenhauer
adds to this that every man takes
the limits of his own eld of vision
for the limits of the world.

The idea of knowledge being
limited to our experience was not
an entirely new one; the ancient
philosopher Empedocles had said
that each man believes only his
experience, and in the 17th
century John Locke had asserted
that no mans knowledge here can
go beyond his experience. But the
reason Schopenhauer gives for this
limitation is quite new, and it
comes from his interpretation of
Kants phenomenal and noumenal
worlds. The important difference
between Kant and Schopenhauer
is that for Schopenhauer, the
phenomenal and noumenal are
not two different realities or worlds,
but the same world, experienced 

Arthur Schopenhauer
Born into a wealthy and
cosmopolitan family in Danzig
(now Gdansk), Schopenhauer
was expected to become a
merchant like his father. He
travelled through France and
England before his family
settled in Hamburg in 1793. In
1805, after his fathers death
possibly by suicidehe felt
able to stop working and go to
university, where he studied
philosophy and psychology.
He maintained an uneasy
relationship with his mother,
who constantly criticized
his achievements.
After completing his
studies, Schopenhauer taught
at Berlin University. He attained
a reputation as a philanderer
and misogynist; he had several
affairs and avoided marriage,
and was once convicted of
assaulting a woman. In 1831
he moved to Frankfurt, where
he lived until his death with a
succession of poodles called
either Atman (soul in
Hinduism and Buddhism) or
Butz (German for hobgoblin).
Key works
1818 and 1844 The World as
Will and Representation
1851 Parerga and
Paralipomena

188 ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER
differently. It is one world, with two
aspects: Will and Representation.
This is most easily evidenced by our
bodies, which we experience in two
ways: we perceive them as objects
(Representations), and experience
them from within (as Will).
Schopenhauer says that an act
of will, such as wishing to raise my
arm, and the resulting movement,
are not in two different worldsthe
noumenal and phenomenalbut
the same event experienced in two
different ways. One is experienced
from inside, the other observed
from outside. When we look at
things outside ourselves, although
we see only their objective
Representation, not their inner
reality or Will, the world as a whole
still has the same simultaneous
outer and inner existences.

A universal Will
Schopenhauer uses the word will
to express a pure energy that has
no driving direction, and yet is
responsible for everything that
manifests itself in the phenomenal
world. He believes, like Kant, that
space and time belong in the
phenomenal worldthey are

Schopenhauer studied the Hindu
Bhagavad Gita, in which Krishna the
charioteer tells Arjuna that a man is
a slave to his desires unless he can
free himself from his cravings.

concepts within our minds, not
things outside of themso the
Will of the world does not mark
time, or follow causal or spatial
laws. This means it must be
timeless and indivisible, and so
must our individual wills. It follows,
then, that the Will of the universe
and individual will are one and the
same thing, and the phenomenal
world is controlled by this vast,
timeless, motiveless Will.

The fundament upon
which all our knowledge
and learning rests
is the inexplicable.
Arthur Schopenhauer

Eastern inuence
At this point in his argument,
Schopenhauers pessimism shows
through. Where contemporaries
such as Hegel saw will as a positive
force, Schopenhauer sees humanity
at the mercy of a mindless, aimless
universal Will. It lies behind our
most basic urges, he insists, and
is what causes us to live lives of
constant disappointment and
frustration as we attempt to relieve
our cravings. For Schopenhauer, the
world is neither good nor bad, but
meaningless, and humans who
struggle to nd happiness achieve
at best gratication and at worst
pain and suffering.
The only escape from this
miserable condition, according to
Schopenhauer, is nonexistence or
at least a loss of will for gratication.
He proposes that relief can be found
through aesthetic contemplation,
especially in music, which is the
one art that does not attempt to
represent the phenomenal world.
Schopenhauers philosophy here
echoes the Buddhist concept of
nirvana (a transcendent state free
from desire or suffering). He had
studied Eastern thinkers and
religions in great detail.
From his idea of one universal
Will, Schopenhauer develops a
moral philosophy that may be
somewhat surprising, considering
his otherwise misanthropic and

pessimistic character. He realizes
that if we can recognize that our
separateness from the universe is
essentially an illusionbecause all
our individual wills and the Will of
the universe are one and the same
thingwe can learn empathy with
everyone and everything else, and
moral goodness can arise from a
universal compassion. Here, again,
Schopenhauers thinking reects
the ideals of Eastern philosophy.

Lasting legacy
Schopenhauer was largely ignored
by other German philosophers in
his lifetime, and his ideas were
overshadowed by those of Hegel,
though he did have an inuence
on writers and musicians. Toward
the end of the 19th century, the
primacy he gave to Will became
a theme in philosophy once more.
Friedrich Nietzsche in particular
acknowledged his inuence, and
Henri Bergson and the American
pragmatists also owe something
to his analysis of the world as Will.
Perhaps Schopenhauers greatest
inuence, however, was in the eld
of psychology, where his ideas
about our basic urges and their
frustration inuenced the
psychoanalytic theories of both
Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. 

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 189

THEOLOGY IS
ANTHROPOLOGY

LUDWIG ANDREAS FEUERBACH (18041872)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of religion
APPROACH
Atheism
BEFORE
C.600 BCE Thales is the rst
Western philosopher to deny
that the universe owes its
existence to a god.
C.500 BCE

The Indian school
of atheistic philosophy known
as Carvaka is established.

C.400 BCE

The ancient Greek
philosopher Diagoras of Melos
puts forward arguments in
defense of atheism.

AFTER
Mid-19th century Karl
Marx uses Feuerbachs
reasoning in his philosophy
of political revolution.
Late 19th century The
psychoanalyst Sigmund
Freud argues that religion is
a projection of human wishes.

T

he 19th-century German
philosopher Ludwig
Feuerbach is best known
for his book The Essence of
Christianity (1841), which inspired
revolutionary thinkers such as Karl
Marx and Friedrich Engels. The
book incorporates much of the
philosophical thinking of Georg
Hegel, but where Hegel saw an
Absolute Spirit as the guiding force
in nature, Feuerbach sees no reason
to look beyond our experience to
explain existence. For Feuerbach,
humans are not an externalized
form of an Absolute Spirit, but the
opposite: we have created the idea
of a great spirit, a god, from our
own longings and desires.

than anthropology (the study of
humanity). Not only have we
deceived ourselves into thinking
that a divine being exists, we have
also forgotten or forsaken what we
are ourselves. We have lost sight of
the fact that these virtues actually
exist in humans, not gods. For this
reason we should focus less on
heavenly righteousness and more
on human justiceit is people
in this life, on this Earth, that
deserve our attention. 

Imagining God
Feuerbach suggests that in our
yearning for all that is best in
humankindlove, compassion,
kindness, and so onwe have
imagined a being that incorporates
all of these qualities in the highest
possible degree, and then called
it God. Theology (the study of
God) is therefore nothing more
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223



The Israelites of the Bible, in their
need for certainty and reassurance,
created a false godthe golden calf
to worship. Feuerbach argues that all
gods are created in the same way.

Georg Hegel 17885



Karl Marx 196203

190

OVER HIS OWN
BODY AND MIND,
THE INDIVIDUAL
IS SOVEREIGN

JOHN STUART MILL (18061873)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Utilitarianism
BEFORE
1651 In Leviathan, Thomas
Hobbes says that people
are brutish and must be
controlled by a social contract.
1689 John Lockes book, Two
Treatises of Government, looks
at social contract theory in the
context of empiricism.
1789 Jeremy Bentham
advocates the greatest
happiness principle.
AFTER
1930s Economist J.M. Keynes,
inuenced by Mill, develops
liberal economic theories.
1971 John Rawls publishes
A Theory of Justice, based on
the idea that laws should be
those everyone would accept.

J

ohn Stuart Mill was born into
an intellectually privileged
family, and he was aware
from an early age of the British
traditions of philosophy that had
emerged during the Enlightenment
of the 18th century. John Locke and
David Hume had established a
philosophy whose new empiricism
stood in stark contrast to the
rationalism of continental European
philosophers. But during the late
18th century, Romantic ideas from
Europe began to inuence British
moral and political philosophy. The
most obvious product of this
inuence was utilitarianism, which
was a very British interpretation of
the political philosophy that had

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 191
See also: Thomas Hobbes 11215  John Locke 13033  Jeremy Bentham 174
Bertrand Russell 23639  Karl Popper 26265  John Rawls 29495

Decisions should be
made on the principle
of the greatest good for
the greatest number.



Individuals should be
free to do whatever gives
them pleasure, even if
it could harm them

John Stuart Mill

Individuals can choose
to do things that affect
their own body, but not
that of someone else.

but they are
not entitled to do
things that could
harm others.

Over his own
body and mind,
the individual
is sovereign.

shaped the 18th-century revolutions
of both Europe and America. Its
originator, Jeremy Bentham, was
a friend of the Mill family, and he
inuenced Johns home education.

Victorian liberalism
As a philosopher Mill sets himself
the task of synthesizing a valuable
intellectual heritage with the new
19th-century Romanticism. His
approach is less sceptical than
that of Hume (who argued that all
knowledge comes from sense

experience, and nothing is certain)
and less dogmatic than Bentham
(who insisted that everything be
judged on its usefulness), but their
empiricism and utilitarianism
informed his thinking. Mills moral
and political philosophy is less
extreme than his predecessors,
aiming for reform rather than
revolution, and it formed the basis
of British Victorian liberalism.
After completing his rst
philosophical work, the exhaustive
six-volume System of Logic, Mill 

John Stuart Mill was born in
London in 1806. His father
was the Scottish philosopher
and historian James Mill, who
founded the movement of
philosophical radicals with
Jeremy Bentham. John was
educated at home by his
father, whose demanding
program began with teaching
Greek to John when he was
only three years old.
After years of intense study,
Mill suffered a breakdown
at the age of 20. He left
university to work for the East
India Company, where he
stayed until his retirement in
1857, as it gave him a living
and time to write. During this
period he met Harriet Taylor,
advocate of womens rights,
whoafter a relationship of 20
yearseventually became his
wife. Mill served as a Member
of Parliament from 1865 to
1868, putting into practice his
moral and political philosophy.
Key works
1843 System of Logic
1848 Principles of Political
Economy
1859 On Liberty
1861 Utilitarianism
1869 The Subjection of Women
1874 On Nature

192 JOHN STUART MILL
turned his attention to moral
philosophy, particularly Benthams
theories of utilitarianism. He had
been struck by the elegant simplicity
of Benthams principle of the
greatest happiness for the greatest
number, and was a rm believer in
its usefulness. He describes his
interpretation of how utilitarianism
might be applied as similar to Jesus
of Nazareths golden rule: do as
you would be done by, and love your
neighbor as yourself. This, he says,
constitutes the ideal perfection of
utilitarian morality.

Legislating for liberty
Mill supports Benthams happiness
principle, but he thinks it lacks
practicality. Bentham had seen the
idea as depending upon an abstract
felicic calculus (an algorithm for
calculating happiness), but Mill

wants to nd out how it might
be implemented in the real world.
He is interested in the social and
political implications of the principle,
rather than merely its use in
making moral decisions. How
would legislation promoting the
greatest happiness of the greatest
number actually affect the
individual? Might laws that sought
to do this, enacting a kind of majority
rule, actually prevent some people
from achieving happiness?
Mill thinks that the solution
is for education and public opinion
to work together to establish an
indissoluble association between
an individuals happiness and the
good of society. As a result, people
would always be motivated to act
not only for their own good or
happiness, but toward that of
everyone. He concludes that society

It is better
to be Socrates
dissatised than
a fool satised.
John Stuart Mill

should therefore allow all individuals
the freedom to pursue happiness.
Furthermore, he says that this
right should be protected by the
government, and that legislation
should be drawn up to protect the
individuals freedom to pursue
personal goals. There is, however,
one situation in which this freedom
should be curtailed, Mill says, and
that is where one persons action
impinges on the happiness of
others. This is known as the harm
principle. He underlines this by
pointing out that in these cases, a
persons own good, either physical
or moral, is not a sufcient warrant.

Quantifying happiness
Mill then turns his attention to how
best to measure happiness. Bentham
had considered the duration and
intensity of pleasures in his felicic
calculus, but Mill thinks it is also
important to consider the quality
of pleasure. By this, he is referring
to the difference between a simple
satisfaction of desires and sensual
pleasures, and happiness gained
The good samaritan helps his enemy
in a biblical parable that demonstrates
Mills golden rule: do as you would be
done by. He believed this would raise
societys overall level of happiness.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 193
through intellectual and cultural
pursuits. In the happiness
equation he gives more weight
to higher, intellectual pleasures
than to baser, physical ones.
In line with his empiricist
background, Mill then tries to pin
down the essence of happiness.
What is it, he asks, that each
individual is striving to achieve?
What causes happiness? He
decides that the sole evidence it is
possible to produce that anything
is desirable, is that people do
actually desire it. This seems a
rather unsatisfactory explanation,
but he goes on to distinguish
between two different desires:
unmotivated desires (the things we
want that will give us pleasure) and
conscientious actions (the things
we do out a sense of duty or charity,
often against our immediate
inclination, that ultimately bring
us pleasure). In the rst case, we
desire something as a part of our
happiness, but in the second we
desire it as a means to our
happiness, which is felt only when
the act reaches its virtuous end.

Practical utilitarianism
Mill was not a purely academic
philosopher, and he believed his
ideas should be put into practice,
so he considered what this might
mean in terms of government and
legislation. He saw any restriction
of the individuals freedom to pursue
happiness as a tyranny, whether
this was the collective tyranny of
the majority (through democratic
election) or the singular rule of a
despot. He therefore suggested
practical measures to restrict the
power of society over the individual,
and to protect the rights of the
individual to free expression.
In his time as a Member of
Parliament, Mill proposed many
reforms which were not to come

The National Society for Womens
Suffrage was set up in Britain in 1868,
a year after Mill tried to secure their
legal right to vote by arguing for an
amendment to the 1867 Reform Act.

about until much later, but his
speeches brought the liberal
applications of his utilitarian
philosophy to the attention of a
wide public. As a philosopher and
politician, he argued strongly in
defense of free speech, for the
promotion of basic human rights,
and against slaveryall of which
were obvious practical applications
of his utilitarianism. Strongly
inuenced by his wife Harriet
Taylor-Mill, he was the rst British
parliamentarian to propose votes
for women as part of his government
reforms. His liberalist philosophy
also encompassed economics, and
contrary to his fathers economic
theories, he advocated a freemarket economy where government
intervention is kept to a minimum.

A softer revolution
Mill places the individual, rather than
society, at the center of his utilitarian
philosophy. What is important is
that individuals are free to think
and act as they please, without
interference, even if what they do is
harmful to them. Every individual,
says Mill in his essay On Liberty,
is sovereign over his own body

and mind. His ideas came to
embody Victorian liberalism,
softening the radical ideas that had
led to revolutions in Europe and
America, and combining them with
the idea of freedom from interference
by authority. This, for Mill, is the
basis for just governance and the
means to social progress, which
was an important Victorian ideal.
He believes that if society leaves
individuals to live in a way that
makes them happy, it enables them
to achieve their potential. This
in turn benets society, as the
achievements of individual talents
contribute to the good of all.
In his own lifetime Mill was
regarded as a signicant philosopher,
and he is now considered by many
to be the architect of Victorian
liberalism. His utilitarian-inspired
philosophy had a direct inuence on
social, political, philosophical, and
economic thinking well into the
20th century. Modern economics
has been shaped from various
interpretations of his application
of utilitarianism to the free market,
notably by the British economist
John Maynard Keynes. In the eld
of ethics, philosophers such as
Bertrand Russell, Karl Popper,
William James, and John Rawls all
took Mill as their starting point. 

One person with a belief
is a social power
equal to 99 who have
only interests.
John Stuart Mill

194

ANXIETY IS THE
DIZZINESS OF
FREEDOM
SREN KIERKEGAARD (18131855)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphysics

When making decisions,
we have absolute
freedom of choice.
We realize that we can
choose to do nothing,
or anything.

APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
1788 Immanuel Kant stresses
the importance of freedom
in moral philosophy in his
Critique of Practical Reason.
180722 Georg Hegel suggests
a historical consciousness,
or Geist, establishing a
relationship between human
consciousness and the world
in which it lives.
AFTER
1927 Martin Heidegger
explores the concepts of Angst
and existential guilt in his
book Being and Time.
1938 Jean-Paul Sartre lays
down the foundations of his
existentialist philosophy.
1946 Ludwig Wittgenstein
acknowledges Kierkegaards
work in Culture and Value.

Our minds reel at
the thought of this
absolute freedom.
A feeling of dread
or anxiety accompanies
the thought.

Anxiety is the
dizziness of freedom.

S

ren Kierkegaards philosophy
developed in reaction to the
German idealist thinking
that dominated continental Europe
in the mid-19th century, particularly
that of Georg Hegel. Kierkegaard
wanted to refute Hegels idea of
a complete philosophical system,
which dened humankind as
part of an inevitable historical

development, by arguing for a more
subjective approach. He wants to
examine what it means to be a
human being, not as part of some
great philosophical system, but as
a self-determining individual.
Kierkegaard believes that our
lives are determined by our actions,
which are themselves determined
by our choices, so how we make

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 195
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471  Georg Hegel 17885  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421
Jean-Paul Sartre 26871  Simone De Beauvoir 27677  Albert Camus 28485

those choices is critical to our lives.
Like Hegel, he sees moral decisions
as a choice between the hedonistic
(self-gratifying) and the ethical. But
where Hegel thought this choice was
largely determined by the historical
and environmental conditions of our
times, Kierkegaard believes that
moral choices are absolutely free,
and above all subjective. It is our will
alone that determines our judgement,
he says. However, far from being a
reason for happiness, this complete
freedom of choice provokes in us a
feeling of anxiety or dread.
Kierkegaard explains this feeling
in his book, The Concept of Anxiety.
As an example, he asks us to
consider a man standing on a cliff
or tall building. If this man looks
over the edge, he experiences two
different kinds of fear: the fear of
falling, and fear brought on by the
impulse to throw himself off the
edge. This second type of fear, or
anxiety, arises from the realization
that he has absolute freedom to
choose whether to jump or not,
and this fear is as dizzying as his
vertigo. Kierkegaard suggests that

Sren Kierkegaard



Martin Heidegger 25255



we experience the same anxiety
in all our moral choices, when we
realize that we have the freedom
to make even the most terrifying
decisions. He describes this anxiety
as the dizziness of freedom, and
goes on to explain that although it
induces despair, it can also shake
us from our unthinking responses
by making us more aware of the
available choices. In this way it
increases our self-awareness and
sense of personal responsibility.

The father of existentialism
Kierkegaards ideas were largely
rejected by his contemporaries, but
proved highly inuential to later
generations. His insistence on the
importance and freedom of our
choices, and our continual search
for meaning and purpose, was
to provide the framework for
existentialism. This philosophy,
developed by Friedrich Nietzsche
and Martin Heidegger, was later
fully dened by Jean-Paul Sartre.
It explores the ways in which we
can live meaningfully in a godless
universe, where every act is a
Sren Kierkegaard was born in
Copenhagen in 1813, in what
became known as the Danish
Golden Age of culture. His father,
a wealthy tradesman, was both
pious and melancholic, and his
son inherited these traits, which
were to greatly inuence his
philosophy. Kierkegaard studied
theology at the University of
Copenhagen, but attended
lectures in philosophy. When he
came into a sizeable inheritance,
he decided to devote his life to
philosophy. In 1837 he met and fell
in love with Regine Olsen, and
three years later they became

Hamlet is caught on the edge of a
terrible choice: whether to kill his uncle
or leave his fathers death unavenged.
Shakespeares play demonstrates the
anxiety of true freedom of choice.

choice, except the act of our own
birth. Unlike these later thinkers,
Kierkegaard did not abandon his
faith in God, but he was the rst to
acknowledge the realization of selfconsciousness and the dizziness
or fear of absolute freedom. 
engaged, but Kierkegaard broke
off the engagement the following
year, saying that his melancholy
made him unsuitable for married
life. Though he never lost his
faith in God, he continually
criticized the Danish national
church for hypocrisy. In 1855 he
fell unconscious in the street,
and died just over a month later.
Key works
1843 Fear and Trembling
1843 Either/Or
1844 The Concept of Anxiety
1847 Works of Love

THE
HISTORY
OF ALL HITHERTO EXISTING

SOCIETY
IS THE HISTORY OF

CLASS
STRUGGLES
KARL MARX (18181883)

198 KARL MARX
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Communism
BEFORE
c.1513 Niccol Machiavelli
discusses class struggles in
ancient Rome and Renaissance
Italy in Discourses on Livy.
1789 The French Revolution
provides the template for most
19th-century philosophical
arguments about revolution.
1800s Georg Hegel develops
a theory of historical change
through intellectual conict.
AFTER
1880s Friedrich Engels tries
to develop Marxs theories into
a fully-edged philosophy of
historical materialism.
1930s Marxism becomes
the ofcial philosophy of the
Soviet Union and many other
communist countries.

C

an the complex history
of the human species be
reduced to a single formula?
One of the greatest thinkers of the
19th century, Karl Marx, believed
that it could. He opened the rst
chapter of his most famous work,
The Communist Manifesto, with
the claim that all historical change
comes about as the result of an
ongoing conict between dominant
(upper) and subordinate (lower)
social classes, and that the roots
of this conict lie in economics.
Marx believed that he had
gained a uniquely important
insight into the nature of society

through the ages. Earlier approaches
to history had emphasized the role
of individual heroes and leaders, or
stressed the role played by ideas,
but Marx focused on a long
succession of group conicts,
including those between ancient
masters and slaves, medieval lords
and serfs, and modern employers
and their employees. It was conicts
between these classes, he claimed,
that caused revolutionary change.

The Communist Manifesto
Marx wrote the Manifesto with
the German philosopher Friedrich
Engels, whom he had met when
they were both studying academic
philosophy in Germany during the
late 1830s. Engels offered nancial
support, ideas, and superior writing
skills, but Marx was acknowledged
as the real genius behind their
combined publications.
In their private manuscripts
from the early and mid-1840s, Marx
and Engels emphasized that while
previous philosophers had only
sought to interpret the world, the
whole point of their activities was
to change it. During the 1850s and
60s Marx rened his ideas in many
short documents, including The
Communist Manifesto, a pamphlet
of about 40 pages.
The Manifesto seeks to explain
the values and political plans of
communisma new belief system
put forward by a small and relatively
new group of radical German
socialists. The Manifesto claims
that society had simplied into
two classes in direct conict: the
bourgeoisie (the capital-owning
class) and the proletariat (the
working class).
The word bourgeoisie is
derived from the French word
burgeis, or burgher: a propertyowning tradesman who had risen
above the general populace to own

Intellectual debate was widespread in
Germany at the time Marx was writing,
though he himself believed that it was
the task of philosophy not to discuss
ideas, but to bring about real change.

and run his own business. Marx
describes how the discovery and
colonization of America, the opening
of the Indian and Chinese markets,
and the increase in the commodities
that could be exchanged had, by
the mid-19th century, led to the
rapid development of commerce
and industry. Craftsmen no longer
produced enough goods for the
growing needs of new markets, and
so the manufacturing system had
taken their place. As the Manifesto
relates, the markets kept growing,
demand ever rising.

Values of the bourgeoisie
Marx claims that the bourgeoisie,
who controlled all this trade, had left
no link between people other than
naked self-interest, than callous
cash payment. People were once
valued for who they were, but the
bourgeoisie has resolved personal
worth into exchange value. Moral,
religious, and even sentimental
values had been cast aside, as

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 199
See also: Niccol Machiavelli 10207  Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459
Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach 189  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421

everyonefrom scientists and
lawyers to priests and poetshad
been transformed into nothing but
a paid laborer. In place of religious
and political illusions, Marx writes,
the bourgeoisie had substituted
naked, shameless, direct, brutal
exploitation. Charters that had once
protected peoples freedom had been
cast aside for one unconscionable
freedomFree Trade.
The only solution, according to
Marx, was for all the instruments of
economic production (such as land,
raw materials, tools, and factories)
to become common property, so
that every member of society could
work according to their capacities,
and consume according to their
needs. This was the only way to
prevent the rich from living at the
expense of the poor.



Adam Smith 16063



Georg Hegel 17885

People align into groups...

...with others who
share their social
and economic interests.

...against those in
conict with their social
and economic interests.

The socio-economic status
of each group is dened by its
relationship to property and
the means of production.

Dialectical change
The philosophy behind Marxs
reasoning on the process of change
came largely from his predecessor,
Georg Hegel, who had described
reality not as a state of affairs, but
as a process of continual change.
The change was caused, he said,
by the fact that every idea or state
of affairs (known as the thesis) 

The proletariat
owns little property
or business.

The bourgeois or
ruling class owns most
of a countrys property
and businesses.

When the means of production
changes, such as from agricultural
to industrial, there are
revolutions and wars.

From each according to
his abilities, to each
according to his needs.
Karl Marx

The ruling class is
displaced and a new
one is created.

History is a
record of these
class struggles and
displacements



200 KARL MARX
contains within it an internal
conict (the antithesis) that
eventually forces a change to occur,
leading to a new idea or state of
affairs (the synthesis). This
process is known as the dialectic.
Hegel believed that we can never
experience things in the world as
they are, but only as they appear to
us. For him, existence primarily
consists of mind or spirit, so the
journey of history, through countless
cycles of the dialectic, is essentially
the progress of spirit, or Geist,
toward a state of absolute harmony.
But it is here that Hegel and Marx
part company. Marx insists that the
process is not a journey of spiritual
development, but of real historical
change. Marx claims that the nal,
conict-free state that lies at the end
of the process is not the spiritual
bliss that Hegel predicted, but the
perfect society, where everyone
works harmoniously toward the
good of a greater whole.

The formation of classes
In earlier ages, humans had been
entirely responsible for producing
everything they neededsuch as

clothing, food, and habitation
for themselves, but as the early
societies began to form, people
came to rely more on one another.
This led to the form of bargain
making described by the Scottish
economist and philosopher Adam
Smith, as people exchanged goods
or labor. Marx agrees with Smith
that this system of exchange led
people to specialize in their labor,
but he points out that this new
specialization (or job) had also
come to dene them. Whatever a
persons specialization or job, be it
agricultural laborer or hereditary
landowner, it had come to dictate
where he or she lived, what they
ate, and what they wore; it also
dictated with whom in society they
shared interests, and with whom
their interests lay in conict. Over
time, this led to the formation of
distinct socio-economic classes,
locked into conict.
According to Marx, there have
been four major stages in human
history, which he sees as based on
four different forms of property
ownership: the original tribal
system of common property; the

The ruling ideas of each
age have ever been the
ideas of its ruling class.
Karl Marx

ancient communal and state
system of ownership (where both
slavery and private property began);
the feudal or estate system of
property; and the modern system of
capitalist production. Each of these
stages represents a different form
of economic system, or mode of
production, and the transitions
between them are marked in
history by stormy political events,
such as wars and revolutions, as
one ruling class is displaced by
another. The Communist Manifesto
popularized the idea that through
understanding the system of
property ownership in any one
society, in any particular era, we can
acquire the key to understanding
its social relations.

Rise of cultural institutions
Marx also believes that an analysis
of the economic basis of any society
allows us to see that as its system
of property alters, so too do its
superstructuressuch as its
politics, laws, art, religions, and
The wealthy bourgeoisie enjoyed
the luxuries of life in the late 18th and
19th centuries, while the workers in
their companies and on their estates
endured terrible poverty.

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 201

The abolition of religion
as the illusory happiness
of the people is required
for real happiness.
Karl Marx

philosophies. These develop to
serve the interests of the ruling
class, promoting its values and
interests, and diverting attention
away from political realities.
However, even this ruling class is
not, in fact, determining events or
institutions. Hegel had said that
every age is held in the sway of the
Zeitgeist, or spirit of the age, and
Marx agrees. But where Hegel saw
the Zeitgeist as determined by an
Absolute Spirit developing over
time, Marx sees it as dened by
the social and economic relations
of an era. These dene the ideas or
consciousness of individuals and
societies. In Marxs view, people
do not make a stamp on their era,
molding it into a particular shape;
the era denes the people.
Marxs revision of Hegels
philosophy from a journey of spirit
to one of social and economic
modes of production was also
inuenced by another German
philosopher, Ludwig Feuerbach.
Feuerbach believed that traditional
The Industrial Revolution saw the
formalization of specialized skills into
paid employment. People then formed
into groups, or classes, made up of those
with similar socio-economic status.

religion is intellectually falseit is
not corroborated in any way by
reasoningand that it contributes
to the general sum of human misery.
He claimed that people make
gods in their own image from
an amalgamation of humanitys
greatest virtues, and then cling to
these gods and invented religions,
preferring their dreams to the real
world. People become alienated
from themselves, through an
unfavorable comparison of their
selves to a god that they have
forgotten they created.
Marx agrees that people cling
to religion because they long for
a place in which the self is not
despised or alienated, but he says
that this is not due to some
authoritarian god, but to material
facts in their actual, daily lives.
The answer for Marx lies not only
in the end of religion, but in total
social and political change.

A Marxist utopia
In addition to its general account
of human history leading to the rise
of the bourgeois and proletarian
classes, The Communist Manifesto

makes a variety of other claims
about politics, society, and
economics. For example, it argues
that the capitalist system is not
merely exploitative, but also
inherently nancially unstable,
leading to the recurrence of
increasingly severe commercial
crises, the growing poverty of the
workforce, and the emergence of
the proletariat as the one genuinely
revolutionary class. For the rst
time in history, this revolutionary
class would represent the vast
majority of humanity.
These developments are seen
as underpinned by the increasingly
complex nature of the process of
production. Marx predicted that
as technology improved, it would
lead to increasing unemployment,
alienating more and more people
from the means of production. This
would split society in two, between
the large numbers of impoverished
people and the few who owned and
controlled the means of production.
Following the rules of the dialectic,
this conict would result in a violent
revolution to establish a new,
classless society. This would 

202 KARL MARX
Socialist-inspired revolutions
swept through Europe just after
the publication of The Communist
Manifesto. These included the
February Revolution of 1848 in Paris.

found expression. Marx saw political
interests and parties as merely
vehicles for the economic interests
of the ruling classes, which were
forced to appear as though they
were acting in the general interest
in order to gain and maintain power.

The road to revolution

be the utopian, conict-free society
that marked the end of the dialectic.
Marx thought this perfect society
would not require government, but
only administration, and this would
be carried out by the leaders of the
revolution: the communist party
(by which he means those who
adhered to the cause, rather than
any specic organization). Within
this new kind of state (which Marx
called the dictatorship of the
proletariat) people would enjoy
genuine democracy and social
ownership of wealth. Shortly after
this nal change in the mode of
production to a perfect society,
Marx predicted, political power as
it had previously been understood
would come to an end, because
there would be no good reason for
political dissent or criminality.

Political power
Marx predicted that the outcome
of the intense class struggles in
Europe between the bourgeoisie

and the wage-earning working
class would become evident only
when the great mass of people had
become property-less and were
obliged to sell their labor for wages.
The juxtaposition of poverty with
the great wealth of the few would
become increasingly obvious, he
thought, and communism would
become increasingly attractive.
However, Marx did not expect
the opponents of communism to
give up their privileges easily. In
every period of history, the ruling
class has enjoyed the advantage of
controlling both the government
and the law as a way of reinforcing
their economic dominance. The
modern state, he said, was actually
a committee for managing the
affairs of the bourgeois class, and
struggles by excluded groups to
have their own interests taken into
accountsuch as the battle to
extend the right to votewere
simply short-term ways in which the
more fundamental economic conict

Marxs originality lies in his
combination of pre-existing ideas
rather than the creation of new
ones. His system uses insights from
German idealist philosophers,
especially Georg Hegel and Ludwig
Feuerbach; from French political
theorists, such as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau; and from British political
economists, particularly Adam
Smith. Socialism had become a
recognized political doctrine in the
rst half of the 19th century, and
from this Marx derives several
insights about property, class,
exploitation, and commercial crises.
Class conict was certainly in
the air when Marx composed the
Manifesto. It was written just
before a succession of revolutions

A specter is haunting
Europethe specter
of communism.
Karl Marx

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 203
against the monarchies of many
continental European countries
broke out in 1848 and 1849. In the
preceding decades, a signicant
number of people had migrated
from the countryside to the towns
in search of work, although
continental Europe had not yet
seen the industrial development
that had taken place in Britain.
A wave of discontent felt by the
poor against the status quo was
exploited by a variety of liberal
and nationalist politicians, and
revolutions rippled across Europe,
although ultimately these uprisings
were defeated and led to little
permanent change.
However, the Manifesto acquired
an iconic status during the 20th
century, inspiring revolutions in
Russia, China, and many other
countries. The brilliance of Marxs
theories has been proved wrong in
practice: the extent of repression in
Stalinist Russia, in Mao Zedongs
China, and in Pol Pots Cambodia,
has widely discredited his political
and historical theories.

Criticism of Marxism
Although Marx did not foresee
communism being implemented
in such a barbaric manner in these
primarily agricultural societies, his

ideas are nevertheless still open to
a variety of criticisms. First, Marx
always argued for the inevitability
of revolution. This was the essential
part of the dialectic, but it is clearly
too simplistic, as human creativity
is always able to produce a variety
of choices, and the dialectic fails
to allow for the possibility of
improvement by gradual reform.
Second, Marx tended to invest
the proletariat with wholly good
attributes, and to suggest that a
communist society would give rise
somehow to a new type of human
being. He never explained how
the dictatorship of this perfect
proletariat would be different from
earlier, brutal forms of dictatorship,
nor how it would avoid the
corrupting effects of power.
Third, Marx rarely discussed
the possibility that new threats
to liberty might emerge after a
successful revolution; he assumed
that poverty was the only real cause
of criminality. His critics have also
alleged that he did not sufciently
understand the forces of nationalism,
and that he gave no proper account
of the role of personal leadership in
politics. In fact, the 20th-century
communist movement was to
produce immensely powerful
personality cults in virtually every
country in which communists
came to power.

Lasting inuence

Marxist states of the 20th century
promoted themselves as utopias. They
produced a proliferation of paintings
and statues glorifying the achievements
of their happy, newly liberated citizens.

Despite the criticism and crises that
Marxs theories have provoked, his
ideas have been hugely inuential.
As a powerful critic of commercial
capitalism, and as an economic
and socialist theorist, Marx is still
considered relevant to politics and
economics today. Many would
agree with the 20th-century
Russian-British philosopher, Isaiah
Berlin, that the The Communist
Manifesto is a work of genius. 

Karl Marx
The most famous revolutionary
thinker of the 19th century
was born in the German city
of Trier. The son of a Jewish
lawyer who had converted to
Christianity, Marx studied law
at Bonn University, where he
met his future wife, Jenny von
Westphalen. He then studied
at the University of Berlin,
before working as a journalist.
The favor he bestowed on
democracy in his writing led
to censorship by the Prussian
royal family, and he was forced
into exile in France and
Belgium. During this time he
developed a unique theory of
communism in collaboration
with his German compatriot
Friedrich Engels.
Marx returned to Germany
during the 184849 revolutions,
but after they were quashed
he lived in exile in London for
the rest of his life. He and his
wife lived in extreme poverty,
and when Marx died stateless
at the age of 64, there were
only 11 mourners at his funeral.
Key works
1846 The German Ideology
1847 The Poverty of Philosophy
1848 The Communist
Manifesto
1867 Das Kapital: Volume 1

204

MUST THE CITIZEN
EVER RESIGN HIS
CONSCIENCE TO
THE
LEGISLATOR?
HENRY DAVID THOREAU (18171862)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Non-conformism
BEFORE
c.340 BCE Aristotle claims that
the city-state is more important
than the individual.
1651 Thomas Hobbes says
that society without strong
government reverts to anarchy.
1762 In The Social Contract,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
proposes government by
the will of the people.
AFTER
1907 Mahatma Gandhi cites
Thoreau as an inuence on
his campaign of passive
resistance in South Africa.
1964 Martin Luther King is
awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for his campaign to
end racial discrimination
through civil disobedience
and noncooperation.

A

lmost a century after JeanJacques Rousseau claimed
that nature was essentially
benign, American philosopher
Henry Thoreau developed the idea
further, arguing that all good
things are wild and free, and that
the laws of man suppress rather
than protect civil liberties. He
saw that political parties were
necessarily one-sided, and that
their policies often ran contrary to
our moral beliefs. For this reason,
he believed it was the individuals
duty to protest against unjust laws,
and argued that passively allowing
such laws to be enacted effectively
gave them justication. Any fool
can make a rule, and any fool will
mind it, as he said about English
grammar, but the principle runs
through his political philosophy too.
In his essay Civil Disobedience,
written in 1849, Thoreau proposes
a citizens right to conscientious
objection through non-cooperation
and non-violent resistancewhich
he put into practice by refusing to
pay taxes that supported the war in
Mexico and perpetuated slavery.

Thoreaus ideas contrasted sharply
with those of his contemporary Karl
Marx, and with the revolutionary
spirit in Europe at the time, which
called for violent action. But they
were later adopted by numerous
leaders of resistance movements,
such as Mahatma Gandhi and
Martin Luther King. 

Mahatma Gandhis campaign of civil
disobedience against British rule in
India included the Salt March of 1930,
undertaken in protest against unjust
laws controlling salt production.

See also: Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459  Adam Smith 16063  Edmund
Burke 17273  Karl Marx 196203  Isaiah Berlin 28081  John Rawls 29495

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 205

CONSIDER WHAT
EFFECTS
THINGS
HAVE
CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE (18391914)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Pragmatism
BEFORE
17th century John Locke
challenges rationalism by
tracing the origin of our
ideas to sense impressions.
18th century Immanuel
Kant argues that speculation
about what lies beyond our
experience is meaningless.
AFTER
1890 S William James and
John Dewey take up the
philosophy of pragmatism.
1920 S Logical positivists in
Vienna formulate the theory of
vericationthat the meaning
of a statement is the method
by which it is veried.
1980 S Richard Rortys version
of pragmatism argues that the
very notion of truth can be
dispensed with.

C

harles Sanders Peirce was
the scientist, logician, and
philosopher of science
who pioneered the philosophical
movement known as pragmatism.
Deeply sceptical of metaphysical
ideassuch as the idea that there
is a real world beyond the world
we experiencehe once asked his
readers to consider what is wrong
with the following theory: a
diamond is actually soft, and only
becomes hard when it is touched.
Peirce argued that there is no
falsity in such thinking, for there
is no way of disproving it. However,
he claimed that the meaning of a
concept (such as diamond or
hard) is derived from the object
or quality that the concept relates
toand the effects it has on our
senses. Whether we think of the
diamond as soft until touched or
always hard before our experience,
therefore, is irrelevant. Under both
theories the diamond feels the
same, and can be used in exactly
the same way. However, the rst
theory is far more difcult to work
with, and so is of less value to us.

This idea, that the meaning of a
concept is the sensory effect of its
object, is known as the pragmatic
maxim, and it became the founding
principle of pragmatismthe belief
that the truth is the account of
reality that works best for us.
One of the key things Peirce
was trying to accomplish was to
show that many debates in science,
philosophy, and theology are
meaningless. He claimed that they
are often debates about words,
rather than reality, because they
are debates in which no effect on
the senses can be specied. 

Nothing is vital for
science; nothing can be.
Charles Sanders Peirce

See also: John Locke 13033  Immanuel Kant 16471
John Dewey 22831  Richard Rorty 31419



William James 20609



206

ACT AS IF
WHAT YOU
DO MAKES A
DIFFERENCE
WILLIAM JAMES (18421910)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Pragmatism
BEFORE
1843 John Stuart Mills
A System of Logic studies the
ways in which we come to
believe something is true.
1870s Charles Sanders Peirce
describes his new pragmatist
philosophy in How to Make
Our Ideas Clear.
AFTER
1907 Henri Bergsons Creative
Evolution describes reality as a
ow rather than a state.
1921 Bertrand Russell explores
reality as pure experience in
The Analysis of Mind.
1925 John Dewey develops a
personal version of pragmatism,
known as instrumentalism,
in Experience and Nature.

O

ver the course of the 19th
century, as the United
States began to nd its
feet as an independent nation,
philosophers from New England
such as Henry David Thoreau and
Ralph Waldo Emerson gave a
recognizably American slant to
European Romantic ideas. But it
was the following generation of
philosophers, who lived almost a
century after the Declaration of
Independence, that came up with
something truly original.
The rst of these, Charles
Sanders Peirce, proposed a theory
of knowledge he called pragmatism,
but his work was hardly noticed at
the time; it fell to his lifelong friend

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 207
See also: John Stuart Mill 19093  Charles Sanders Peirce 205  Henri Bergson 22627
Bertrand Russell 23639  Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651  Richard Rorty 31419

that it leads
nowhere.

So I do nothing,
stay lost, starve,
and die.

If I am lost in a
forest and see a path,
I can believe

My action has
made my beliefs
come true.



John Dewey 22831



...that it leads to
food and shelter.

So I follow it and
nd a way out
of the forest
to safety.

Act as if what
you do makes
a difference.
It does.

William Jamesgodson to Ralph
Emersonto champion Peirces
ideas and develop them further.

Truth and usefulness
Central to Peirces pragmatism was
the theory that we do not acquire
knowledge simply by observing,
but by doing, and that we rely on
that knowledge only so long as it is
useful, in the sense that it adequately
explains things for us. When it no
longer fulls that function, or better
explanations make it redundant, we
replace it. For example, we can see
by looking back in history how our

ideas about the world have changed
constantly, from thinking that Earth
is at to knowing it to be round; from
assuming that Earth is the center of
the universe, to realizing that it is
just one planet in a vast cosmos. The
older assumptions worked perfectly
adequately as explanations in their
time, yet they are not true, and the
universe itself has not changed.
This demonstrates how knowledge
as an explanatory tool is different
from facts. Peirce examined the
nature of knowledge in this way,
but James was to apply this
reasoning to the notion of truth. 

Every way of
classifying a thing
is but a way of
handling it for some
particular purpose.
William James

208 WILLIAM JAMES
The idea of a at Earth served well
as a truth for several thousand years,
despite the fact that Earth is a sphere.
James claims that an ideas usefulness
determines its truthfulness.

For James, the truth of an idea
depends on how useful it is; that is
to say, whether or not it does what
is required of it. If an idea does not
contradict the known factssuch
as laws of scienceand it does
provide a means of predicting
things accurately enough for our
purposes, he says there can be no
reason not to consider it true, in the
same way that Peirce considered
knowledge as a useful tool

William James

irrespective of the facts. This
interpretation of truth not only
distinguishes it from fact, but also
leads James to propose that the
truth of an idea is not a stagnant
property inherent in it. Truth
happens to an idea. It becomes
true, is made true by events. Its
verity is in fact an event, a process.
Any idea, if acted upon, is found to
be true by the action we take;
putting the idea into practice is the
Born in New York City, William
James was brought up in a
wealthy and intellectual family;
his father was a famously eccentric
theologian, and his brother Henry
became a well-known author.
During his childhood he lived for
several years in Europe, where he
pursued a love of painting, but at
the age of 19 he abandoned this
to study science. His studies at
Harvard Medical School were
interrupted by the ill health and
depression that were to prevent
him from ever practicing medicine,
but he eventually graduated and
in 1872 took a teaching post in

process by which it becomes true.
James also thinks that belief in
an idea is an important factor in
choosing to act upon it, and in this
way belief is a part of the process
that makes an idea true. If I am
faced with a difcult decision, my
belief in a particular idea will lead
to a particular course of action and
so contribute to its success. It is
because of this that James denes
true beliefs as those that prove
useful to the believer. Again, he is
careful to distinguish these from
facts, which he says are not true.
They simply are. Truth is the
function of the beliefs that start
and terminate among them.

The right to believe
Every time we try to establish a
new belief, it would be useful if we
had all the available evidence and
the time to make a considered
decision. But in much of life we do
not have that luxury; either there
is not enough time to examine the
physiology at Harvard University.
His increasing interest in the
subjects of psychology and
philosophy led him to write
acclaimed publications in these
elds, and he was awarded
a professorship in philosophy
at Harvard in 1880. He taught
there until his retirement in 1907.
Key works
1890 The Principles of Psychology
1896 The Will to Believe
1902 The Varieties of Religious
Experience
1907 Pragmatism

THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 209
known facts, or there is not enough
evidence, and we are forced to a
decision. We have to rely on our
beliefs to guide our actions, and
James says that we have the right
to believe in these cases.
James explains this by taking
the example of a man lost and
starving in a forest. When he sees a
path, it is important for him to believe
that the path will lead him out of the
forest and to habitation, because if
he does not believe it, he will not
take the path, and will remain lost
and starving. But if he does, he will
save himself. By acting on his idea
that the path will lead him to safety,
it becomes true. In this way our
actions and decisions make our
belief in an idea become true. This
is why James asserts act as if what
you do makes a differenceto
which he adds the typically concise
and good-humored rider, it does.
We must, however, approach
this idea with caution: a shallow

Religious belief can bring about
extraordinary changes in peoples lives,
such as the healing of the sick at places
of pilgrimage. This occurs regardless
of whether or not a god actually exists.

interpretation of what James is
saying could give the impression
that any belief, no matter how
outlandish, could become true by
acting upon itwhich of course
is not what he meant. There are
certain conditions that an idea
must full before it can be
considered a justiable belief. The
available evidence must weigh in
its favor, and the idea must be
sufcient to withstand criticism.
In the process of acting upon the
belief, it must continually justify
itself by its usefulness in increasing
our understanding or predicting
results. And even then, it is only in
retrospect that we can safely say
that the belief has become true
through our acting upon it.

Reality as a process
James was a psychologist as well
as a philosopher, and he sees the
implications of his ideas in terms
of human psychology as much as
in the theory of knowledge. He
recognized the psychological
necessity for humans to hold certain
beliefs, particularly religious ones.
James thinks that while it is not
justiable as a fact, belief in a god is
useful to its believer if it allows him
or her to lead a more fullled life, or
to overcome the fear of death. These
thingsa more fullled life and a
fearless confrontation of death
become true; they happen as the
result of a belief, and the decisions
and actions based upon it.
Along with his pragmatic notion
of truth, James proposes a type of
metaphysics that he calls radical
empiricism. This approach takes
reality to be a dynamic, active
process, in the same way that truth
is a process. Like the traditional
empiricists before him, James
rejected the rationalist notion that
the changing world is in some way
unreal, but he also went further to

The pragmatic method
means looking away from
principles and looking
towards consequences.
William James

state that for pragmatism, [reality]
is still in the making, as truth is
constantly being made to happen.
This stream of reality, he believes,
is not susceptible to empirical
analysis either, both because it is
in continual ux and because the
act of observing it affects the truth
of the analysis. In Jamess radical
empiricism, from which both mind
and matter are formed, the ultimate
stuff of reality is pure experience.

Continuing inuence
Pragmatism, proposed by Peirce and
expounded by James, established
America as a signicant center
for philosophical thought in the
20thcentury. Jamess pragmatic
interpretation of truth inuenced
the philosophy of John Dewey, and
spawned a neopragmatist school
of thought in America that includes
philosophers such as Richard Rorty.
In Europe, Bertrand Russell and
Ludwig Wittgenstein were indebted
to Jamess metaphysics. His
work in psychology was equally
inuential, and often intimately
connected with his philosophy,
notably his concept of the stream
of consciousness, which in turn
inuenced writers such as Virginia
Woolf and James Joyce. 

THE MOD
WORLD
19001950

ERN

212 INTRODUCTION

Death of Friedrich
Nietzsche, whose
philosophy proposed
that God is dead.

1900

T

Edmund Husserl
publishes The Idea
of Phenomenology.

Bertrand Russell and
Alfred North Whitehead
co-author The Principles of
Mathematics, set philosophers
on a new analytical path.

The October Revolution
takes place in Russia,
leading to the creation
of the Soviet Union.

1907

191013

1917

1906

1908

191418

1921

Albert Einstein
introduces his theory
of relativity.

Henry Ford produces
the Model T Ford
the worlds rst
mass-produced car.

World War I leads to the
collapse of the Russian,
German, Ottoman, and
Austro-Hungarian empires.

Ludwig
Wittgenstein
publishes his
Tractatus
LogicoPhilosophicus.

oward the end of the
19thcentury, philosophy
once again reached a
turning point. Science, and
particularly Charles Darwins
theory of evolution (1859), had
thrown into doubt the idea of the
universe as Gods creation, with
humankind as the peak of his
creative genius. Moral and political
philosophy had become entirely
human-centered, with Karl Marx
declaring religion the opiate of the
people. Following in the footsteps
of Arthur Schopenhauer, Friedrich
Nietzsche believed that Western
philosophy, with its roots in Greek
and Judaeo-Christian traditions,
was ill-equipped to explain this
modern world view. He proposed
a radical new approach to nding
meaning in life, one that involved
casting aside old values and

traditions. In doing so, he set the
agenda for much of the philosophy
of the 20th century.

A new analytical tradition
To some extent, the traditional
concerns of philosophysuch as
asking what existswere answered
by science in the early 20th century.
Albert Einsteins theories offered
a more detailed explanation of the
nature of the universe, and Sigmund
Freuds psychoanalytic theories
gave people a radically new insight
into the workings of the mind.
As a result, philosophers turned
their attention to questions of
moral and political philosophy or,
since philosophy had become the
province of professional academics,
to the more abstract business of
logic and linguistic analysis. At the
vanguard of this movement of logical

analysiswhich became known
as analytic philosophywas the
work of Gottlob Frege, who linked
the philosophical process of logic
with mathematics. His ideas
were enthusiastically received
by a British philosopher and
mathematician, Bertrand Russell.
Russell applied the principles
of logic that Frege had outlined to
a thorough analysis of mathematics
in the Principia Mathematica,
which he wrote with Alfred North
Whitehead, and thenin a move
that revolutionized philosophical
thinkinghe applied the same
principles to language. The process
of linguistic analysis was to
become the major theme in
20thcentury British philosophy.
One of Russells pupils, Ludwig
Wittgenstein, developed Russells
work on logic and language, but

THE MODERN WORLD 213

Josef Stalin is made
General Secretary
of the Communist
Party in Russia.

Martin Heidegger
publishes Being and Time.

Karl Popper publishes
The Logic of Scientic
Discovery, challenging the
idea that science always
proceeds from repeated
observations to theories.

1922

1927

1934

Jean-Paul Sartre
becomes one of the most
important continental
philosophers with the
existentialist work Being
and Nothingness.

1943

1923

1929

193945

1949

Psychoanalyst
Sigmund Freud
publishes The Ego
and the Id.

The Wall Street
Crash leads to global
economic depression.

In World War II, the
deadliest war in
history, more than
60 million people die.

The Communists
under Mao
Zedong proclaim
the Peoples
Republic
of China.

also made key contributions in
areas as diverse as perception,
ethics, and aesthetics, becoming
one of the greatest thinkers of the
20th century. Another, slightly
younger Viennese philosopher, Karl
Popper, took his cue from Einstein,
and strengthened the link between
scientic thinking and philosophy.
Meanwhile, in Germany,
philosophers rose to the challenge
posed by Nietzsches ideas with a
philosophy based on the experience
of the individual in a godless
universe: existentialism. Edmund
Husserls phenomenology (the study
of experience) laid the groundwork,
and this was carried forward by
Martin Heidegger, who was also
greatly inuenced by the Danish
philosopher, Sren Kierkegaard.
Heideggers work, produced in the
1920s and 30s, was largely rejected

in the mid-20th century due to his
connections with the Nazi party
during World War II, but his works
were key to the development of
existentialism, and were important
to late 20th-century culture.

Wars and revolutions
Philosophy was as affected by the
massive political upheavals of the
20th century as any other cultural
activity, but it also contributed to
the ideologies that shaped the
modern world. The revolution that
formed the Soviet Union in the
1920s had its roots in Marxism, a
19th-century political philosophy.
This theory became more prevalent
globally than any single religion,
dominating the policy of Chinas
Communist Party until around
1982, and replacing traditional
philosophies across Asia.

Liberal democracies in Europe
during the 1930s were threatened
by fascism, forcing many thinkers
to ee from the continent to Britain
and the US. Philosophers turned
their attention to left-wing or liberal
politics in reaction to the oppression
they experienced under totalitarian
regimes. World War II and the Cold
War that followed it colored the
moral philosophy of the second
half of the 20th century.
In France, existentialism was
made fashionable by Jean-Paul
Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and
Albert Camus, who were all
novelists. This trend was in keeping
with the French view of philosophy
as part of an essentially literary
culture. It was also fundamental
to the direction that continental
philosophy was to take in the last
decades of the 20th century. 

MAN
IS SOMETHING TO BE

SURPASSED
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE (18441900)

216 FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics

Christianity says
that everything in this
world is less important
than that of the next
after death.

APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
380 BCE Plato explores the
distinction between reality
and appearance in his
dialogue, The Republic.
1st century CE The Sermon
on the Mount, in Matthews
gospel in the Bible, advocates
turning away from this world
to the greater reality of the
world to come.

It says we should
turn away from what
seems important in
this life, and try
to transcend it.

1781 Immanuel Kants Critique
of Pure Reason argues that we
can never know how the world
is in itself.
AFTER
1930s Nietzsches work is
used to help construct the
mythology of Nazism.
1966 Michel Foucaults The
Order of Things discusses
the overcoming of man.

N

ietzsches idea that man
is something to be
surpassed appears in
Thus Spoke Zarathustra, perhaps
his most famous book. It was
written in three parts in 188384,
with a fourth part added in 1885.
The German philosopher used it
to launch a sustained attack on
the history of Western thought.
He targets three linked ideas in
particular: rst, the idea we
have of man or human nature;
second, the idea we have of God;
and third, the ideas we have about
morality, or ethics.

We must
surpass this
limiting idea.

And besides,
God is dead!

But in doing this
we turn away from
life itself.

Elsewhere Nietzsche writes about
philosophizing with a hammer,
and here he certainly attempts to
shatter many of the most cherished
views of the Western philosophical
tradition, especially in relation to
these three things. He does so in a
style that is astonishingly hot-headed
and fevered, so that at times the
book seems closer to prophecy than
philosophy. It was written quickly,
with Part I taking him only a few
days to set down on paper. Even so,
while Nietzsches book does not
have the calm, analytical tone that
people have perhaps come to

Christianitys
idea of man
undermines us.

expect of philosophical works, the
author still succeeds in setting out
a remarkably consistent and hugely
challenging vision.

Zarathustra descends
The name of Nietzsches prophet,
Zarathustra, is an alternative name
for the ancient Persian prophet
Zoroaster. The book begins by
telling us that at the age of 30,
Zarathustra goes to live in the
mountains. For ten years he
delights in the solitude, but one
dawn, he wakes to nd that he is
weary of the wisdom he has

THE MODERN WORLD 217
See also: Plato 5055  Immanuel Kant 16471  Sren Kierkegaard 19495
Michel Foucault 30203  Jacques Derrida 30813

accumulated alone on the mountain.
So he decides to descend to the
market place to share this wisdom
with the rest of humankind.
On the way down to the town,
at the foot of the hill, he meets with
an old hermit. The two men have
already met, ten years before, when
Zarathustra rst ascended the
mountain. The hermit sees that
Zarathustra has changed during
the past decade: when he climbed
the mountain, the hermit says,
Zarathustra carried ashes; but now,
as he descends, he is carrying re.
Then the hermit asks Zarathustra
a question: why are you going to
the trouble of sharing your wisdom?
He advises Zarathustra to stay in
the mountains, warning him that
nobody will understand his
message. Zarathustra then asks a
question: what does the hermit do
in the mountains? The hermit
replies that he sings, weeps, laughs,
mumbles, and praises God. On
hearing this, Zarathustra himself
laughs. Then he wishes the hermit
well and continues on his way
down the mountain. As he goes,

Friedrich Nietzsche



Albert Camus 28485



Zarathustra says to himself, How
can it be possible! This old hermit
has not yet heard that God is dead.

Behold the Superman
The idea of the death of God may
be the most famous of all Nietzsches
ideas, and it is closely related both
to the idea that man is something
to be surpassed and to Nietzsches
distinctive understanding of
morality. The relationship between
these things becomes clear as the
story continues.
When he reaches the town,
Zarathustra sees that there is a
crowd gathered around a tightrope
walker who is about to perform,
and he joins them. Before the
acrobat has a chance to walk across
his rope, Zarathustra stands up. It
is at this point that he says, Behold!
I teach you the Superman! He
continues by telling the crowd the
real point he wishes to convey:
Man is something to surpassed....
Zarathustra follows this with a long
speech, but when he gets to the
end, the crowd only laughs,
imagining that the prophet is 
Nietzsche was born in Prussia in
1844 to a religious family; his
father, uncle, and grandfathers
were all Lutheran ministers. His
father and younger brother died
when he was a young child, and
he was brought up by his mother,
grandmother, and two aunts. At
the age of 24 he became a professor
at Basel University, where he met
the composer Richard Wagner,
who inuenced him strongly until
Wagners anti-semitism forced
Nietzsche to end their friendship.
In 1870 he contracted diphtheria
and dysentery, and thereafter
suffered continual ill health. He

The prophet Zoroaster (c.628551 BCE),
also known as Zarathustra, founded a
religion based on the struggle between
good and evil. Nietzsches Zarathustra
places himself beyond good and evil.

was forced to resign his
professorship in 1879, and for
the next ten years traveled in
Europe. In 1889 he collapsed in
the street while attempting to
prevent a horse from being
whipped, and suffered some
form of mental breakdown from
which he never recovered. He
died in 1900 aged 56.
Key works
1872 The Birth of Tragedy
188385 Thus Spoke Zarathustra
1886 Beyond Good and Evil
1888 Twilight of the Idols

218 FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
just another showman, or perhaps
even a warm-up performer for the
tightrope-walker.
In opening his book in this
unusual way, Nietzsche seems to
be betraying his own unease with
the reception that his philosophy
will receive, as if he is afraid that he
will be seen as a philosophical
showman without anything real
to say. If we want to avoid making
the same mistake as the crowd
gathered around Zarathustra, and
actually understand what Nietzsche
is saying, it is necessary to explore
some of Nietzsches core beliefs.

Overturning old values
Nietzsche believes that certain
concepts have become inextricably
entangled: humankind, morality,
and God. When his character
Zarathustra says that God is dead,
he is not simply launching an
attack upon religion, but doing
something much bolder. God here
does not only mean the god that
philosophers talk about or the
religious pray to; it means the sum

total of the higher values that we
might hold. The death of God is not
just the death of a deity; it is also
the death of all the so-called higher
values that we have inherited.
One of the central purposes of
Nietzsches philosophy is what he
calls the revaluation of all values,
an attempt to call into question all
of the ways that we are accustomed
to thinking about ethics and the
meanings and purposes of life.
Nietzsche repeatedly maintains
that in doing so he is setting out a
philosophy of cheerfulness, which,
although it overturns everything we
have thought up until now about
good and evil, nevertheless seeks to
afrm life. He claims that many of
the things that we think are good
are, in fact, ways of limiting, or of
turning away from, life.
We may think it is not good to
make a fool of ourselves in public,
and so resist the urge to dance
joyfully in the street. We may
believe that the desires of the esh
are sinful, and so punish ourselves
when they arise. We may stay in

mind-numbing jobs, not because
we need to, but because we feel it is
our duty to do so. Nietzsche wants
to put an end to such life-denying
philosophies, so that humankind
can see itself in a different way.

Blaspheming against life
After Zarathustra proclaims the
coming of the Superman, he swiftly
moves to condemn religion. In the
past, he says, the greatest blasphemy
was to blaspheme against God; but
now the greatest blasphemy is to
blaspheme against life itself. This is
the error that Zarathustra believes
he made upon the hillside: in turning
away from the world, and in offering
up prayers to a God who is not
there, he was sinning against life.
The history behind this death
of God, or loss of faith in our higher
values, is told in Nietzsches essay,
How the Real World at last Became
a Myth, which was published in
Twilight of the Idols. The essay
carries the subtitle History of an
Error, and it is an extraordinarily
condensed one-page history of

Man is a rope tied
between the animal
and the Superman
a rope over an abyss.
Friedrich Nietzsche

Existing between the levels of
animal and Superman, human life,
Nietzsche says, is a dangerous
wayfaring, a dangerous looking-back,
a dangerous trembling and halting.

THE MODERN WORLD 219
Western philosophy. The story
begins, Nietzsche says, with the
Greek philosopher Plato.

Some religions and philosophies insist that a more
important real world exists elsewhere. Nietzsche sees
this as a myth that tragically prevents us from living
fully now, in this world.

The real world
Plato divided the world into an
apparent world that appears to
us through our senses, and a real
world that we can grasp through
the intellect. For Plato, the world
we perceive through the senses is
not real because it is changeable
and subject to decay. Plato suggests
that there is also an unchanging,
permanent real world that can
be attained with the help of the
intellect. This idea comes from
Platos study of mathematics.
The form or idea of a triangle, for
example, is eternal and can be
grasped by the intellect. We know
that a triangle is a three-sided,
two-dimensional gure whose
angles add up to 180, and that
this will always be true, whether
anyone is thinking about it or not
and however many triangles exist
in the world. On the other hand,
the triangular things that do exist
in the world (such as sandwiches,
pyramids, and triangular shapes
drawn on a chalkboard), are
triangular only insofar as they
are reections of this idea or form
of the triangle.
Inuenced by mathematics in
this way, Plato proposed that the
intellect can gain access to a
whole world of Ideal Forms, which
is permanent and unchanging,
whereas the senses have access
only to the world of appearances.
So, for example, if we want to know
about goodness, we need to have
an intellectual appreciation of the
Form of Goodness, of which the
various examples of goodness in
the world are only reections.
This is an idea that has had farreaching consequences for our
understanding of the world; not least

this world, even beauty, is
only a shadow of Forms
in another world.

Christianity sees this
life as merely a forerunner
to the more important
life after death.

because, as Nietzsche points out,
this way of dividing up the world
makes the real world of the
intellect the place where everything
of value resides. In contrast, it
makes the apparent world of the
senses a world that is, relatively
speaking, unimportant.

Christian values
Nietzsche traces the fortunes of
this tendency to split the world into
two and nds that the same idea
appears within Christian thought.
In place of the real world of Platos
Forms, Christianity substitutes an
alternative real world; a future world
of heaven that is promised to the
virtuous. Nietzsche believes that

Christianity views the world we live
in now as somehow less real than
heaven, but in this version of the
two worlds idea the real world is
attainable, albeit after death and on
condition that we follow Christian
rules in this life. The present world
is devalued, as it is with Plato, except
insofar as it acts as a stepping stone
to the world beyond. Nietzsche
claims that Christianity asks us to
deny the present life in favor of the
promise of a life to come.
Both the Platonic and Christian
versions of the idea that the world
is divided into a real and an
apparent one have profoundly
affected our thoughts about
ourselves. The suggestion that 

220 FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
The Superman is someone of
enormous strength and independence
in mind and body; Nietzsche denied
any had existed, but named Napoleon,
Shakespeare, and Socrates as models.

absolutely unattainableeven to the
wise or the virtuous, in this world or
the nextthen it is an idea grown
useless, superuous. As a result, it
is an idea that we need to do away
with. If God is dead, Nietzsche is
perhaps the person who stumbles
across the corpse; nevertheless, it
is Kant whose ngerprints are all
over the murder weapon.

Philosophys longest error

everything of value in the world is
somehow beyond the reach of this
world leads to a way of thinking
that is fundamentally life-denying.
As a result of this Platonic and
Christian heritage, we have come
to see the world we live in as a
world that we should resent and
disdain, a world from which we
should turn away, transcend, and
certainly not enjoy. But in doing so,
we have turned away from life itself
in favor of a myth or an invention,
an imagined real world that is
situated elsewhere. Nietzsche calls
priests of all religions preachers of
death, because their teachings
encourage us to turn from this
world, and from life to death. But
why does Nietzsche insist that God
is dead? To answer this, we must

look to the work of the 18th-century
German philosopher Immanuel
Kant, whose ideas are critical to
understanding the philosophy
behind Nietzsches work.

A world beyond reach
Kant was interested in the limits
of knowledge. In his book Critique
of Pure Reason, he argued that we
cannot know the world as it is in
itself. We cannot attain it with the
intellect, as Plato believed; nor is it
promised to us after death as in
the Christian view. It exists (we
assume), but it is forever out of
reach. The reasons that Kant uses
to come up with this conclusion are
complex, but what is important
from Nietzsches point of view is
that, if the real world is said to be

Once we have dispensed with the
idea of the real world, the longheld distinction between the real
world and the apparent world
begins to break down. In How the
Real World at last Became a Myth,
Nietzsche goes on to explain this
as follows: We have abolished the
real world; what world is left? The
apparent world, perhaps?  But
no! With the real world we have
also abolished the apparent world.
Nietzsche now sees the beginning
of the end of philosophys longest
error: its infatuation with the
distinction between appearance
and reality, and the idea of two
worlds. The end of this error,
Nietzsche writes, is the zenith of
mankindthe high point of all
humanity. It is at this pointin an
essay written six years after Thus
Spake Zarathustrathat Nietzsche
writes Zarathustra begins.
This is a key moment for
Nietzsche because when we grasp
the fact that there is only one world,
we suddenly see the error that had
put all values beyond this world.
We are then forced to reconsider
all our values and even what it
means to be human. And when we
see through these philosophical

THE MODERN WORLD 221
illusions, the old idea of man can
be surpassed. The Superman is
Nietzsches vision of a fundamentally
life-afrming way of being. It is one
that can become the bearer of
meaning not in the world beyond,
but here; Superman is the
meaning of the Earth.

Creating ourselves
Nietzsches writings did not reach
a large audience in his lifetime, so
much so that he had to pay for the
publication of the nal part of Thus
Spoke Zarathustra himself. But
around 30years after his death in
1900, the idea of the Superman fed
into the rhetoric of Nazism through
Hitlers readings of Nietzsches
work. Nietzsches ideas about the
Superman, and particularly his call
for an eradication of the JewishChristian morality that held sway
throughout Europe would have been
attractive to Hitler as validation for
his own aims. But where Nietzsche
seemed to be searching for a return
to the more rustic, life-afrming
values of pagan Europe, Hitler

took his writings as an excuse for
unbridled violence and transgression
on a grand scale. The consensus
amongst scholars is that Nietzsche
himself would have been horried
by this turn of events. Writing in
an era of extraordinary nationalism,
patriotism, and colonial expansion,
Nietzsche was one of the few
thinkers to call these assumptions
into question. At one point in Thus
Spoke Zarathustra he makes it
clear that he considers nationalism
a form of alienation or failure. Only
where the state ends, Zarathustra
says, there begins the human
being who is not superuous.
Nietzsches open-ended idea of
human possibility was important
to many philosophers in the period
following World War II. His ideas
about religion and the importance
of self-evaluation can be traced
especially in the work of succeeding
existentialists such as the French
philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. Like
Nietzsches Superman, Sartre says
that we must each dene the
meaning of our own existence.

The degree of
introspection achieved by
Nietzsche had never been
achieved by anyone.
Sigmund Freud

Nietzsches damning criticisms of
the Western philosophical tradition
have had a huge impact not only on
philosophy, but also on European
and world culture, and they went
on to inuence countless artists
and writers in the 20th century. 
Nietzsches writings were edited
and censored by his anti-semitic sister
Elizabeth, who controlled his archive
after he became insane. This allowed
the Nazis to wilfully misinterpret them.

222

MEN WITH
SELF-CONFIDENCE
COME AND
SEE
AND
CONQUER
AHAD HAAM (18561927)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Cultural Zionism
BEFORE
5th century BCE Socrates
combines both condence
and an admission of his
own foolishness.
1511 Desiderius Erasmus
writes The Praise of Folly, a
satirical work which appears
to praise foolish behavior.
1711 The English poet
Alexander Pope writes that
Fools rush in where angels
fear to tread.
1843 In his book Fear and
Trembling, Sren Kierkegaard
writes about founding faith
on the strength of the absurd.
AFTER
1961 Michel Foucault writes
Madness and Civilization, a
philosophical study of the
history of folly.

A

had Haam was the pen
name of the Ukrainianborn Jewish philosopher
Asher Ginzberg, a leading Zionist
thinker who advocated a Jewish
spiritual renaissance. In 1890 he
claimed in a semi-satirical essay
that although we worship wisdom,
self-condence matters more.
In any difcult or dangerous
situation, he says, the wise are
those who hold back, weighing up
the advantages and disadvantages
of any action. Meanwhile (and
greatly to the disapproval of the
wise) it is the self-condent who
forge ahead, and often win the day.
Haam wants to suggestand
when reading him we should
remember that this is a suggestion
that is meant half-seriously and
half-satiricallythat individual folly
can often yield a result, simply
because of the self-condence that
goes along with it.

Wisdom and condence
Although in his original essay
Haam seemed to celebrate the
potential advantages of foolishness,
See also: Socrates 4649
Luce Irigaray 320



this was a view from which he
later distanced himself, perhaps
afraid that others might read what
was essentially an exercise in
satire as if it were written with
high-minded seriousness. Selfcondence is only warranted,
he later made clear, when the
difculties of an undertaking are
fully understood and evaluated.
Haam was fond of quoting an
old Yiddish proverb: an act of folly
which turns out well is still an act
of folly. On some occasions we act
foolishly, without fully understanding
the difculties of the task we are
undertaking, but we win through
because luck is on our side.
However, says Haam, this does
not make our prior foolishness in
any way commendable.
If we want our actions to bring
results, it may indeed be the case
that we need to develop and use
the kind of self-condence that can
occasionally be seen in acts of folly.
At the same time, we must always
temper this self-condence with
wisdom, or our acts will lack true
effectiveness in the world. 

Sren Kierkegaard 19495



Michel Foucault 30203 

THE MODERN WORLD 223

EVERY MESSAGE
IS MADE OF
SIGNS
FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE (18571913)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of language
APPROACH
Semiotics
BEFORE
c.400 BCE Plato explores the
relationship between names
and things.
c.250 BCE Stoic philosophers
develop an early theory of
linguistic signs.
1632 Portuguese philosopher
John Poinsot writes his
Treatise on Signs.
AFTER
1950s Saussures analysis of
the structures of language
inuences Noam Chomskys
theory of generative grammar,
which aims to expose the rules
of a language that govern its
possible word combinations.
1960s Roland Barthes explores
the literary implications of
signs and semiotics.

S

aussure was a 19th-century
Swiss philosopher who saw
language as made up of
systems of signs, with the signs
acting as the basic units of the
language. His studies formed the
basis of a new theory, known as
semiotics. This new theory of signs
was developed by other philosophers
during the 20th century such as
Russias Roman Jakobson, who
summed up the semiotic approach
when he said that every message
is made of signs.
Saussure said that a sign is made
up of two things. Firstly, a signier,
which is a sound-image. This is not
the actual sound, but the mental
image we have of the sound.
Secondly, the signied, or concept.
Here Saussure turns his back on a
long tradition that says language is
about the relationships between
words and things, because he is
saying that both aspects of a sign
are mental (our concept of a dog
for example, and a sound-image of
the sound dog). Saussure claims
that any messagefor example
my dog is called Fredis a system

of signs. This means that it is a
system of relationships between
sound-images and concepts.
However, Saussure states that the
relationship between the signied
and the signier is arbitraryso
there is nothing particularly
doggy about the sound dog,
which is why the word can be
chien in French, or gou in Chinese.
Saussures work on language
became the basis of modern
linguistics, and inuenced many
philosophers and literary theorists. 

In the lives of individuals
and of societies, language
is a factor of greater
importance than any other.
Ferdinand de Saussure

See also: Plato 5055  Charles Sanders Peirce 205  Ludwig Wittgenstein
24651  Roland Barthes 29091  Julia Kristeva 323

224

EXPERIENCE
BY ITSELF IS
NOT SCIENCE
EDMUND HUSSERL (18591938)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ontology

Science aspires to
certainty about the world.

APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
5th century BCE Socrates
uses argument to try to
answer philosophical
questions with certainty.
17th century Ren Descartes
uses doubt as a starting point
for his philosophical method.

But science is empirical:
it depends upon
experience.

1874 Franz Brentano, Husserls
teacher, claims that philosophy
needs a new scientic method.
AFTER
From 1920s Martin
Heidegger, Husserls student,
develops his teachers method
of phenomenology, leading to
the birth of existentialism.
From 1930s Husserls
phenomenology reaches
France, inuencing thinkers
such as Emmanuel Levinas
and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.

H

usserl was a philosopher
haunted by a dream that
has preoccupied thinkers
since the time of the ancient
Greek philosopher Socrates: the
dream of certainty. For Socrates,
the problem was this: although we
easily reach agreement on questions
about things we can measure (for
example, how many olives are
there in this jar?), when it comes
to philosophical questions such
as what is justice? or what is
beauty?, it seems that there is no
clear way of reaching agreement.
And if we cannot know for certain
what justice is, then how can we
say anything about it at all?

The problem of certainty
Experience is subject to
assumptions and biases.

So experience
by itself is
not science.

Husserl was a philosopher who
started life as a mathematician.
He dreamed that problems such as
what is justice? might be solved
with the same degree of certainty
with which we are able to solve
mathematical problems such as
how many olives are in the jar? In
other words, he hoped to put all the
sciencesby which he meant all
branches of human knowledge and
activity, from math, chemistry,
and physics to ethics and politics 
on a completely secure footing.

THE MODERN WORLD 225
See also: Ren Descartes 11623
25255  Emmanuel Levinas 273




Franz Brentano 336  Martin Heidegger
Maurice Merleau-Ponty 27475

Scientic theories are based on
experience. But Husserl believed
that experience alone did not add
up to science, because as any
scientist knows, experience is full
of all kinds of assumptions, biases,
and misconceptions. Husserl
wanted to drive out all of these
uncertainties to give science
absolutely certain foundations.
To do this, Husserl made use of
the philosophy of the 19th-century
philosopher Ren Descartes. Like
Husserl, Descartes wanted to free
philosophy from all assumptions,
biases, and doubts. Descartes wrote
that although almost everything
could be doubted, he could not
doubt that he was doubting.

Phenomenology
Husserl takes up a similar approach
to Descartes, but uses it differently.
He suggests that if we adopt a
scientic attitude to experience,
laying aside every single assumption
that we have (even including the
assumption that an external world
exists outside of us), then we can

Mathematics does not rely on
empirical evidence, which is full of
assumptions, to reach its conclusions.
Husserl wanted to put all science (and
all knowledge) on a similar foundation.

We entirely lack
a rational science
of man and of the
human community.
Edmund Husserl

start philosophy with a clean slate,
free of all assumptions. Husserl
calls this approach phenomenology:
a philosophical investigation of
the phenomena of experience. We
need to look at experience with a
scientic attitude, laying to one
side (or bracketing out as Husserl
calls it) every single one of our
assumptions. And if we look
carefully and patiently enough, we
can build a secure foundation of
knowledge that might help us deal
with the philosophical problems
that have been with us since the
very beginnings of philosophy.
However, different philosophers
following Husserls method came
to different results, and there was
little agreement as to what the
method actually was, or how one
carried it out. Toward the end of his
career, Husserl wrote that the
dream of putting the sciences on
rm foundations was over. But
although Husserls phenomenology
failed to provide philosophers with
a scientic approach to experience,
or to solve philosophys most
enduring problems, it nevertheless
gave birth to one of the richest
traditions in 20th-century thought. 

Edmund Husserl
Husserl was born in 1859
in Moravia, then a part of
the Austrian empire. He
started his career studying
mathematics and astronomy,
but after nishing his
doctorate in mathematics he
decided to take up philosophy.
In 1887 Husserl married
Malvine Steinschneider, with
whom he had three children.
He also became Privatdozent
(private lecturer) at Halle,
where he remained until 1901.
He then accepted an associate
professorship at the University
of Gttingen, before becoming
a professor of philosophy at
the University of Freiburg in
1916, where Martin Heidegger
was among his students. In
1933, Husserl was suspended
from the university on account
of his Jewish background, a
decision in which Heidegger
was implicated. Husserl
continued to write until his
death in 1938.
Key works
1901 Logical Investigations
1907 The Idea of
Phenomenology
1911 Philosophy as a
Rigorous Science
1913 Ideas toward a Pure
Phenomenology

226

INTUITION GOES
IN THE VERY
DIRECTION
OF
LIFE
HENRI BERGSON (18591941)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology

kinds of knowledge.

APPROACH
Vitalism
BEFORE
13th century John Duns
Scotus distinguishes between
intuitive and abstract thought,
and claims that intuitive
thought takes precedence.

Relative knowledge:
knowing objects
in the world from a
particular perspective.

Absolute knowledge:
knowing objects in
the world as
they actually are.

This is gained by using
our intellect and reason;
we are distanced from
the thing itself.

This is acquired
through an intuitive grasp
of the truth; it is a very direct
form of knowledge.

1781 Immanuel Kant publishes
Critique of Pure Reason,
claiming that absolute
knowledge is impossible.
AFTER
1890s William James begins
to explore the philosophy
of everyday experience,
popularizing pragmatism.
1927 Alfred North Whitehead
writes Process philosophy,
suggesting that the existence
of the natural world should be
understood in terms of process
and change, not things or
xed stabilities.

Intuition goes
in the very
direction of life.

THE MODERN WORLD 227
See also: John Duns Scotus 333
Gilles Deleuze 338



Immanuel Kant 16471

H

enri Bergsons 1910 book
Creative Evolution explored
his vitalism, or theory of
life. In it, Bergson wanted to discover
whether it is possible to really know
somethingnot just to know about
it, but to know it as it actually is.
Ever since the philosopher
Immanuel Kant published The
Critique of Pure Reason in 1781,
many philosophers have claimed
that it is impossible for us to know
things as they actually are. This is
because Kant showed that we can
know how things are relative to we
ourselves, given the kinds of minds
we have; but we can never step
outside of ourselves to achieve an
absolute view of the worlds actual
things-in-themselves.

Two forms of knowledge
Bergson, however, does not agree
with Kant. He says that there are
two different kinds of knowledge:
relative knowledge, which involves
knowing something from our own
unique particular perspective;
and absolute knowledge, which is
knowing things as they actually

Henri Bergson



William James 20609

are. Bergson believes that these are
reached by different methods, the
rst through analysis or intellect,
and the second through intuition.
Kants mistake, Bergson believes,
is that he does not recognize the
full importance of our faculty of
intuition, which allows us to grasp
an objects uniqueness through
direct connection. Our intuition is
linked to what Bergson called our
lan vital, a life-force (vitalism) that
interprets the ux of experience in
terms of time rather than space.
Suppose you want to get to know
a city, he says. You could compile a
record of it by taking photographs
of every part, from every possible
perspective, before reconstructing
these images to give some idea of
the city as a whole. But you would
be grasping it at one remove, not as
a living city. If, on the other hand,
you were simply to stroll around the
streets, paying attention in the right
way, you might acquire knowledge
of the city itselfa direct knowledge
of the city as it actually is. This
direct knowledge, for Bergson, is
knowledge of the essence of the city.
Henri Bergson was one of the most
inuential French philosophers
of his time. Born in France in 1859,
he was the son of an English
mother and a Polish father. His
early intellectual interests lay in
mathematics, at which he excelled.
Despite this, he took up philosophy
as a career, initially teaching in
schools. When his book Matter
and Memory was published in
1896, he was elected to the
Collge de France and became
a university lecturer. He also had
a successful political career, and
represented the French government
during the establishment of the



Alfred North Whitehead 336



Capturing the essence of a city,
person, or object may only be possible
through direct knowledge gained from
intuition, not analysis. Bergson says we
underestimate the value of our intuition.

But how do we practice intuition?
Essentially, it is a matter of seeing
the world in terms of our sense of
unfolding time. While walking
through the city, we have a sense
of our own inner time, and we also
have an inner sense of the various
unfolding times of the city through
which we are walking. As these
times overlap, Bergson believes that
we can make a direct connection
with the essence of life itself. 
League of Nations in 1913. His
work was widely translated
and inuenced many other
philosophers and psychologists,
including William James. He
was awarded the Nobel Prize
for Literature in 1928, and died
in 1941 at the age of 81.
Key works
1896 Matter and Memory
1903 An Introduction to
Metaphysics
1910 Creative Evolution
1932 The Two Sources of
Morality and Religion

228

WE ONLY THINK
WHEN WE ARE
CONFRONTED
WITH PROBLEMS
JOHN DEWEY (18591952)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Pragmatism
BEFORE
1859 Charles Darwins On
the Origin of Species puts
human beings in a new,
naturalistic perspective.
1878 Charles Sanders Peirces
essay How to Make our Ideas
Clear lays the foundations of
the pragmatist movement.
1907 William James publishes
Pragmatism: A New Name for
Some Old Ways of Thinking,
popularizing the philosophical
term pragmatism.
AFTER
From 1970 Jrgen Habermas
applies pragmatic principles
to social theory.
1979 Richard Rorty combines
pragmatism with analytic
philosophy in Philosophy and
the Mirror of Nature.

J

ohn Dewey belongs to the
philosophical school known
as pragmatism, which arose
in the US in the late 19th century.
The founder is generally considered
to be the philosopher Charles
Sanders Peirce, who wrote a
groundbreaking essay in 1878
called How to Make our Ideas Clear.
Pragmatism starts from the
position that the purpose of
philosophy, or thinking, is not
to provide us with a true picture
of the world, but to help us to act
more effectively within it. If we are
taking a pragmatic perspective,
we should not be asking is this the

THE MODERN WORLD 229
See also: Heraclitus 40  Charles Sanders Peirce 205
Jrgen Habermas 30607  Richard Rorty 31419

Problems arise
because we are trying
to make sense of



William James 20609



the challenges
of living in a
changing world.

John Dewey
We only think
when we are
confronted with
problems.

the traditions
we have inherited.
Philosophy is not about
gaining a true picture of
the world, but about practical
problem solving.

way things are? but rather, what
are the practical implications of
adopting this perspective?
For Dewey, philosophical
problems are not abstract problems
divorced from peoples lives. He
sees them as problems that occur
because humans are living beings
trying to make sense of their
world, struggling to decide how
best to act within it. Philosophy
starts from our everyday human
hopes and aspirations, and from
the problems that arise in the
course of our lives. This being the
case, Dewey thinks that philosophy
should also be a way of nding

practical responses to these
problems. He believes that
philosophizing is not about being
a spectator who looks at the
world from afar, but about actively
engaging in the problems of life.

Evolving creatures
Dewey was strongly inuenced
by the evolutionary thought of the
naturalist Charles Darwin, who
published On The Origin of Species
in 1859. Darwin described humans
as living creatures who are a part
of the natural world. Like the other
animals, humans have evolved in
response to their changing 

John Dewey was born in
Vermont, USA, in 1859. He
studied at the University of
Vermont, and then worked as
a schoolteacher for three years
before returning to undertake
further study in psychology
and philosophy. He taught at
various leading universities for
the remainder of his life, and
wrote extensively on a broad
range of topics, from education
to democracy, psychology,
and art. In addition to his
work as a scholar, he set up
an educational institution
the University of Chicago
Laboratory Schoolswhich
put into practice his
educational philosophy of
learning by doing. This
institution is still running
today. Deweys broad range of
interests, and his abilities as a
communicator, allowed his
inuence on American public
life to extend far beyond the
Laboratory Schools. He wrote
about philosophy and social
issues until he died in 1952 at
the age of 92.
Key works
1910 How We Think
1925 Experience and Nature
1929 The Quest for Certainty
1934 Art as Experience

230 JOHN DEWEY
environments. For Dewey, one of
the implications of Darwins
thought is that it requires us to
think of human beings not as xed
essences created by God, but
instead as natural beings. We are
not souls who belong in some other,
non-material world, but evolved
organisms who are trying to do our
best to survive in a world of which
we are inescapably a part.

Everything changes
Dewey also takes from Darwin the
idea that nature as a whole is a
system that is in a constant state of
change; an idea that itself echoes
the philosophy of the ancient Greek
philosopher Heraclitus. When
Dewey comes to think about what
philosophical problems are, and
how they arise, he takes this
insight as a starting point.
Dewey discusses the idea that
we only think when confronted
with problems in an essay entitled
Kant and the Philosophic Method
(1884). We are, he says, organisms
that nd ourselves having to respond
to a world that is subject to constant
change and ux. Existence is a
risk, or a gamble, and the world
is fundamentally unstable. We
depend upon our environment to
be able to survive and thrive, but

We do not solve
philosophical problems,
we get over them.
John Dewey

the many environments in which
we nd ourselves are themselves
always changing. Not only this, but
these environments do not change
in a predictable fashion. For several
years there may be a good crop of
wheat, for instance, but then the
harvest fails. A sailor may set sail
under ne weather, only to nd that
a storm suddenly blows up out of
nowhere. We are healthy for years,
and then disease strikes us when
we least expect it.
In the face of this uncertainty,
Dewey says that there are two
different strategies we can adopt.
We can either appeal to higher
beings and hidden forces in the
universe for help, or we can seek
to understand the world and gain
control of our environment.

Appeasing the gods
The rst of these strategies involves
attempting to affect the world by
means of magical rites, ceremonies,
and sacrices. This approach to the
uncertainty of the world, Dewey
believes, forms the basis of both
religion and ethics.
In the story that Dewey tells,
our ancestors worshipped gods and
spirits as a way of trying to ally
themselves with the powers that
dispense fortune. This scenario is
played out in stories from around the
world, in myths and legends such as
those about unfortunate seafarers
who pray to gods or saints to calm
the storm, and thereby survive. In
the same way, Dewey believes,
ethics arises out of the attempts
our ancestors made to appease
hidden forces; but where they made
sacrices, we strike bargains with
the gods, promising to be good if
they spare us from harm.
The alternative response to the
uncertainties of our changing world
is to develop various techniques of
mastering the world, so that we

We no longer employ sacrice as a
way to ask for help from the gods, but
many people nd themselves offering
up a silent promise to be good in return
for help from some higher being.

can live in it more easily. We can
learn the art of forecasting the
weather, and build houses to
shelter ourselves from its extremes,
and so on. Rather than attempting
to ally ourselves with the hidden
powers of the universe, this
strategy involves nding ways of
revealing how our environment
works, and then working out how
to transform it to our benet.
Dewey points out that it is
important to realize that we can
never completely control our
environment or transform it to
such an extent that we can drive
out all uncertainty. At best, he
says, we can modify the risky,
uncertain nature of the world in
which we nd ourselves. But life
is inescapably risky.

A luminous philosophy
For much of human history, Dewey
writes, these two approaches to
dealing with the riskiness of life
have existed in tension with each
other, and they have given rise to
two different kinds of knowledge:

THE MODERN WORLD 231
Scientic experiments, such as those
performed by Benjamin Franklin in the
1740s, help us gain control over the
world. Dewey thought philosophical
theories should be equally useful.

He is critical of any philosophical
approaches that ultimately make
our experience more puzzling,
or the world more mysterious.
Second, he thinks we should judge
a philosophical theory by asking
to what extent it succeeds in
addressing the problems of living.
Is it useful to us, in our everyday
lives? Does it, for instance, yield
the enrichment and increase of
power that we have come to
expect from new scientic theories?

A practical inuence

on the one hand, ethics and religion;
and on the other hand, arts and
technologies. Or, more simply,
tradition and science. Philosophy,
in Deweys view, is the process by
means of which we try to work
through the contradictions between
these two different kinds of
response to the problems in our
lives. These contradictions are not
just theoretical; they are also
practical. For example, I may have
inherited innumerable traditional
beliefs about ethics, meaning, and
what constitutes a good life, but
I may nd that these beliefs are in
tension with the knowledge and
understanding that I have gained

from studying the sciences. In this
context philosophy can be seen as
the art of nding both theoretical
and practical responses to these
problems and contradictions.
There are two ways in which to
judge whether a form of philosophy
is successful. First, we should ask
whether it has made the world
more intelligible. Does this
particular philosophical theory
make our experience more
luminous, Dewey asks, or does it
make it more opaque? Here
Dewey is agreeing with Peirce that
philosophys purpose is to make our
ideas and our everyday experience
clearer and easier to understand.

A number of philosophers, such as
Bertrand Russell, have criticized
pragmatism by claiming that it
has simply given up on the long
philosophical quest for truth.
Nevertheless, Deweys philosophy
has been enormously inuential in
America. Given that Dewey places
such an overriding emphasis on
responding to the practical problems
of life, it is perhaps unsurprising
that much of his inuence has been
in practical realms, such as in
education and in politics. 

Education is not an affair
of telling and being told,
but an active and
constructive process.
John Dewey

232

THOSE WHO CANNOT
REMEMBER THE PAST
ARE CONDEMNED
TO
REPEAT
IT
GEORGE SANTAYANA (18631952)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of history
APPROACH
Naturalism
BEFORE
55 BCE Lucretius, a Roman
poet, explores the origins of
societies and civilizations.

I

n The Life of Reason (1905), the
Spanish-American philosopher
George Santayana wrote that
those who cannot remember the
past are condemned to repeat it.
Santayanas naturalistic approach
means that he sees knowledge and
belief as arising not from reasoning,
but through interaction between
our minds and the material
environment. Santayana is often
misquoted as saying that those

1730s The Italian philosopher
Giovanni Vico claims that all
civilizations pass through
three stages: the age of the
gods; the age of artistocrats
and heroes; and democracy.
This is due to an uninterrupted
order of causes and effects.
180722 Georg Hegel writes
of history as the continual
progress of mind or spirit.
AFTER
2004 In his book, Memory,
History, Forgetting, French
philosopher Paul Ricoeur
explores the necessity not
only of remembering, but
also of forgetting the past.

who do not remember the past are
condemned to repeat it, and this is
sometimes understood to mean
that we must do our best to
remember past atrocities. But
Santayana is actually making a
point about progress. For progress
to be possible, we must not only
remember past experiences, but
also be able to learn from them; to
see different ways of doing things.
The psyche structures new beliefs
through experiences, and this is
how we prevent ourselves from
repeating mistakes.
Real progress, Santayana
believes, is not so much a matter
of revolution as of adaptation, taking
what we have learned from the past
and using it to build the future.
Civilization is cumulative, always
building on what has gone before,
in the same way that a symphony
builds note by note into a whole. 
Progress is only possible through
an understanding of the past coupled
with a sense of possible alternatives.
The AT&T Building, New York, uses
old architectural patterns in new ways.

See also: Georg Hegel 17885
Bertrand Russell 23639



Karl Marx 196203  William James 20609 

THE MODERN WORLD 233

IT IS ONLY SUFFERING
THAT MAKES US
PERSONS
MIGUEL DE UNAMUNO (18641936)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ontology
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
c.500 BCE The Buddha
claims that all life is marked
by suffering and offers the
Eightfold Path as a route to
release from its causes.
c.400 CE Saint Augustine asks
how there can be suffering in
a world created by a good and
all-powerful God.
AFTER
1940 The Irish author and
scholar C.S. Lewis explores
the question of suffering in
his book The Problem of Pain.
20th century Unamunos
philosophy of suffering
inuences other Spanish
writers such as Federico
Garca Lorca and Juan Ramn
Jimnez, and the British author
Graham Greene.

T

he Spanish philosopher,
novelist, and poet, Miguel
de Unamuno, is perhaps
best known for his book The Tragic
Sense of Life (1913). In this he
writes that all consciousness is
consciousness of death (we are
painfully aware of our lack of
immortality) and of suffering.
What makes us human is the
fact that we suffer.
At rst glance, it may seem
as if this idea is close to that of
Sidhartha Gautama, the Buddha,
who also said that suffering is an
inescapable part of all human life.
But Unamunos response to suffering
is very different. Unlike the Buddha,
Unamuno does not see suffering as
a problem to be overcome through
practicing detachment. Instead he
argues that suffering is an essential
part of what it means to exist as a
human being, and a vital experience.
If all consciousness amounts to
consciousness of human mortality
and suffering, as Unamuno claims,
and if consciousness is what
makes us distinctively human,
then the only way we can lend

our lives a kind of weight and
substance is to embrace this
suffering. If we turn away from
it, we are not only turning away
from what makes us human, we
are also turning away from
consciousness itself.

Love or happiness
There is also an ethical dimension
to Unamunos ideas on suffering.
He claims that it is essential to
acknowledge our pain, because
it is only when we face the fact of
our own suffering that we become
capable of truly loving other
suffering beings. This presents us
with a stark choice. On the one
hand, we can choose happiness
and do our best to turn away from
suffering. On the other hand, we
can choose suffering and love.
The rst choice may be easier,
but it is a choice that ultimately
limits us  indeed, severs us from
an essential part of ourselves. The
second choice is more difcult,
but it is one that opens the way
to the possibility of a life of depth
and signicance. 

See also: Siddhartha Gautama 3033  St Augustine of Hippo 7273 
Martin Heidegger 25255  Albert Camus 28485  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

234

BELIEVE IN LIFE
WILLIAM DU BOIS (18681963)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Pragmatism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
explores the ancient Greek
ethical concept of eudaimonia
or human ourishing.
1845 Publication of Narrative
of the Life of Frederick
Douglass, an American Slave
boosts support for the abolition
of slavery in the United States.
Late 19th and early 20th
century Pragmatists, such as
Charles Sanders Peirce and
William James, argue that we
should judge the value of ideas
in terms of their usefulness.
AFTER
1950s and 1960s Martin
Luther King Jr., leader of the
African-American Civil Rights
movement, adopts a policy of
non-violent direct action to
address social segregation.

I

n 1957, close to the end of
his long life, the American
academic, political radical,
and civil rights activist, William
Du Bois, wrote what has become
known as his last message to the
world. Knowing that he did not
have much longer to live, he penned
a short passage to be read at his
funeral. In this message, Du Bois
expresses his hope that any good
he has done will survive long
enough to justify his life, and that
those things he has left undone, or
has done badly, may be taken up by
others to be bettered or completed.

We aspire to
a broader and
fuller life.

To attain this
we need to believe
in the possibility
of progress.

Always, Du Bois writes, human
beings will live and progress to a
greater, broader, and fuller life.
This is a statement of belief rather
than a statement of fact. It is as if
Du Bois is saying that we must
believe in the possibility of a fuller
life, or in the possibility of progress,
to be able to progress at all. In this
idea, Du Bois shows the inuence
of the American philosophical
movement known as Pragmatism,
which claims that what matters is
not just our thoughts and beliefs,
but also the practical implications
of these thoughts and beliefs.

believe
in life.

So we must...

If we lose this belief,
we suffer a form
of death: existence
without growth.

THE MODERN WORLD 235
See also: Aristotle 5663



Charles Sanders Peirce 205



William James 20609



John Dewey 22831

The problem of the 20th
century is the problem
of the color line.
William Du Bois

Du Bois goes on to say that the
only possible death is to lose ones
belief in the prospects for human
progress. But there are also hints
of deeper philosophical roots here,
going all the way back to the
ancient Greek idea of eudaimonia
or human ourishing; for the
philosopher Aristotle, this involved
living a life of excellence based
upon virtue and reason.

Political activist
Du Bois considers two of the major
impediments to a life of excellence
to be racism and social inequality.

William Du Bois

He rejects scientic racismthe
idea that black people are inferior
genetically to white peoplethat
was prevalent throughout most of
his life. As racial inequality has
no basis in biological science,
he regards it as a purely social
problem, one that can be addressed
only by committed political and
social activism.
Du Bois is tireless in his search
for solutions to the problem of all
forms of social inequality. He
argues that social inequality is
one of the major causes of crime,
claiming that lack of education and

Martin Luther King Jr. cited Du
Bois writings as a key inuence in his
decision to become actively involved in
the battle to demolish racial divisions
and establish social equality in the US.

Du Bois showed exceptional
academic promise from an early
age. He won a scholarship to Fisk
University, and spent two years in
Germany studying in Berlin before
attending Harvard, where he
wrote a dissertation on the slave
trade. He was the rst AfricanAmerican to graduate from
Harvard with a doctorate.
Alongside an active career as
a university teacher and writer,
Du Bois was involved in the Civil
Rights movement and in radical
politics. His political judgement
has sometimes been called into
question: he famously wrote a

glowing eulogy on the death of
the Soviet dictator Josef Stalin.
Nevertheless, Du Bois remains
a key gure in the struggle for
racial equality, thanks to what
Martin Luther King Jr. called his
divine dissatisfaction with all
forms of injustice.

employment are correlated with
high levels of criminal activity.
In his nal message to the world,
Du Bois reminds us that the task
of bringing about a more just society
is still incomplete. He states that it
is up to future generations to believe
in life, so that we can continue to
contribute to the fullment of
human ourishing. 

Key works
1903 The Souls of Black Folk
1915 The Negro
1924 The Gift of Black Folk
1940 Dusk of Dawn: An Essay
Toward an Autobiography of
a Race Concept

236

THE ROAD TO
HAPPINESS LIES
IN AN ORGANIZED
DIMINUTION
OF WORK
BERTRAND RUSSELL (18721970)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
1867 Karl Marx publishes the
rst volume of Capital.
1905 In The Protestant Ethic
and the Spirit of Capitalism,
German sociologist Max
Weber argues that the
Protestant work ethic was
partly responsible for the
growth of capitalism.
AFTER
1990s Growth of the trend
of downshifting, promoting
fewer working hours.
2005 Tom Hodgkinson,
editor of the British magazine
The Idler, publishes his leisurepraising book How To Be Idle.
2009 British philosopher Alain
de Botton explores our working
lives in The Pleasures and
Sorrows of Work.

T

he British philosopher
Bertrand Russell was no
stranger to hard work. His
collected writings ll countless
volumes; he was responsible for
some of the most important
developments in 20th-century
philosophy, including the founding
of the school of analytic philosophy;
and throughout his long lifehe
died aged 97he was a tireless
social activist. So why is this most
active of thinkers suggesting that
we should work less?
Russells essay In Praise of
Idleness was rst published in
1932, in the middle of the Great

THE MODERN WORLD 237
See also: Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459  Adam Smith 160163  Edmund Burke 17273  Jeremy Bentham 174 
John Stuart Mill 19093  Karl Marx 196203  Henry David Thoreau 204  Isaiah Berlin 28081  John Rawls 29495

Depression, a period of global
economic crisis following the Wall
Street Crash of 1929. It might seem
distasteful to promote the virtues
of idleness at such a time, when
unemployment was rising to a third
of the working population in some
parts of the world. For Russell,
however, the economic chaos of
the time was itself the result of a
set of deep-rooted and mistaken
attitudes about work. Indeed, he
claims that many of our ideas
about work are little more than
superstitions, which should be
swept away by rigorous thinking.

class and the middle class. But to
these Russell adds a third class,
who he claims has a lot to answer
forthat of the leisured landowner
who avoids all work, and who
depends on the labor of others
to support his or her idleness.
According to Russell, history is
littered with examples of people
working hard all their lives and
being allowed to keep just enough
for themselves and their families
to survive, while any surplus they
produce is appropriated by warriors,
priests, and the leisured ruling
classes. And it is always these
beneciaries of the system, says 

The Great Depression was the worst
economic depression of the 20th century.
For Russell, it highlighted the need for a
critique of capitalism and a re-evaluation
of the ethics of work.

What is work?
Russell begins by dening work,
which he says is of two kinds. First,
there is work aimed at altering the
position of matter at or near the
earths surface relative to other
such matter. This is the most
fundamental sense of workthat
of manual labor. The second kind of
work is telling other people to alter
the position of matter relative to
other such matter. This second
kind of work, Russell says, can be
extended indenitelynot only
can you have people employed to
supervise people who move matter,
but others can be employed to
supervise the supervisors, or give
advice on how to employ other
people, while still more can be
employed to manage the people
who give advice on how to employ
people, and so on. The rst kind
of work, he says, tends to be
unpleasant and badly paid, while
the second tends to be more
pleasant, and better paid. These
two types of work dene two types
of workerthe laborer and the
supervisorand these in turn relate
to two social classesthe working

Our attitudes to work
are irrational.

We value different
types of work
differently.

We assume that work
is good in itself.

These attitudes lead
to unhappiness.

So we should recognize
what work is genuinely
valuable, and only do this.

Working less will
increase human
happiness.

238 BERTRAND RUSSELL
Russell, who are heard extolling
the virtues of honest toil, giving
a moral gloss to a system that is
manifestly unjust. And this fact
alone, according to Russell, should
prompt us to re-evaluate the ethics
of work, for by embracing honest
toil we comply with and even
promote our own oppression.
Russells account of society,
with its emphasis on the struggle
between classes, owes something
to the thought of the 19th-century
philosopher Karl Marx, although
Russell was always uneasy with
Marxism, and his essay is as
critical of Marxist states as it is
of capitalist states. His view also
owes much to Max Webers book
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit
of Capitalism, rst published in 1905,
particularly Webers examination
of the moral claims that underlie
our attitudes to workclaims that
Russell insists should be challenged.
For example, not only do we see
work as a duty and an obligation,
we also see different types of work
as occupying a hierarchy of virtue.
Manual work is generally considered
less virtuous than more skilled or
intellectual work, and we tend to
reward people in accordance with

Bertrand Russell

this perceived virtue rather than
for what they produce. And given
that we consider work itself to be
inherently virtuous, we tend to see
the unemployed as lacking in virtue.
The more we think about it, the
more it seems that our attitudes
toward work are both complex and
incoherent. What, then, can be
done? Russells suggestion is that
we look at work not in terms of
these curious moral ideas that
are a relic of earlier times, but in
terms of what makes for a full and
satisfying human life. And when
we do this, Russell believes, it is
hard to avoid the conclusion that
we should all simply work less.
What, Russell asks, if the working
day were only four hours long? Our
present system is such that part of
the population can be overworked,
and so miserable, while another
part can be totally unemployed,
and so also miserable. This, it
seems, does not benet anyone.

The importance of play
Russells view is that reducing our
working hours would free us to
pursue more creative interests.
Moving matter about, Russell
writes, is emphatically not one of
Bertrand Russell was born in
Wales in 1872 to an aristocratic
family. He had an early interest
in mathematics, and went on to
study the subject at Cambridge.
There he met the philosopher
Alfred North Whitehead, with
whom he later collaborated on the
Principia Mathematica, a book
that established him as one of the
leading philosophers of his era. It
was also at Cambridge that he
met, and deeply inuenced, the
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Russell wanted philosophy to
speak to ordinary people. He was
a social activist, a pacist, an

Immense harm
is caused by
the belief that
work is virtuous.
Bertrand Russell

the ends of human life. If we allow
work to occupy every waking hour,
we are not living fully. Russell
believes that leisure, previously
something known only to the
privileged few, is necessary for a
rich and meaningful life. It might
be objected that nobody would
know what to do with their time
if they worked only for four hours
a day, but Russell regrets this.
If this is true, he says, it is a
condemnation of our civilization,
suggesting that our capacity for
play and light-heartedness has been
eclipsed by the cult of efciency.
A society that took leisure seriously,
educationalist, an advocate of
atheism, and a campaigner
against nuclear arms, as well as
the author of numerous popular
works of philosophy. He died of
inuenza in February, 1970.
Key works
1903 The Principles of
Mathematics
1910, 1912, and 1913 (3 vols)
Principia Mathematica
1914 Our Knowledge of the
External World
1927 The Analysis of Matter
1956 Logic and Knowledge

THE MODERN WORLD 239

The morality of work is
the morality of slaves, and
the modern world has
no need of slavery.
Bertrand Russell

Russell believes, would be one that
took education seriouslybecause
education is surely about more than
training for the workplace. It would
be one that took the arts seriously,
because there would be time to
produce works of quality without
the struggle that artists have for
economic independence. Moreover,
it would be one that took the need
for enjoyment seriously. Indeed,
Russell believes that such a society
would be one in which we would
lose the taste for war because, if
nothing else, war would involve
long and severe work for all.

The balanced life
Russells essay may appear to
present something of a Utopian
vision of a world in which work is
reduced to a minimum. It is not
entirely clear how, even if it were
possible to reduce the working day
to four hours, this change would
lead to the social revolution that
Russell claims. Nor is Russells faith
in the idea that industrialization
can ultimately free us from manual
Leisure time, for Russell, should
no longer be spent merely recovering
from work. On the contrary, it should
constitute the largest part of our lives
and be a source of play and creativity.

labor entirely convincing. The raw
materials for industrial production
still need to come from somewhere.
They need to be mined and rened
and exported to the place of
production, all of which depends
on manual labor. Despite these
problems, Russells reminder that
we need to look more closely at
our attitudes to work is one that
remains relevant today. We take as
natural the length of the working
week and the fact that some kinds
of work are rewarded more than
others. For many of us, neither our

work nor our leisure are as fullling
as we believe they could be, and at
the same time we cannot help
feeling that idleness is a vice.
Russells idea reminds us that not
only do we need to scrutinize our
working lives, but that there is a
virtue and a usefulness to lounging,
loang, and idling. As Russell
says: Hitherto we have continued
to be as energetic as we were
before there were machines; in
this we have been foolish, but
there is no reason to go on being
foolish forever. 

240

LOVE IS A BRIDGE
FROM POORER TO
RICHER
KNOWLEDGE
MAX SCHELER (18741928)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
C.380 BCE Plato writes his
Symposium, a philosophical
exploration of the nature of
love and knowledge.
17th century Blaise Pascal
writes of the logic of the
human heart.
Early 20th century Edmund
Husserl develops his new
phenomenological method
for studying the experience
of the human mind.
AFTER
1954 Polish philosopher Karol
Wojtyza (later Pope John Paul
II) writes his PhD thesis on
Scheler, acknowledging the
philosophers inuence on
Roman Catholicism.

T

he German philosopher
Max Scheler belongs to the
philosophical movement
known as phenomenology. This
attempts to investigate all the
phenomena of our inner experience;
it is the study of our consciousness
and its structures.
Scheler says that phenomenology
has tended to focus too exclusively
on the intellect in examining
the structures of consciousness,
and has overlooked something
fundamental: the experience of
love, or of the human heart. He
introduces the idea that love forms
a bridge from poorer to richer
knowledge in an essay entitled
Love and Knowledge (1923).
Schelers starting point, which is
taken from the 17th-century French
philosopher Blaise Pascal, is that
there is a specic logic to the
human heart. This logic is different
from the logic of the intellect.

knowledge possible. Scheler writes
that love is a kind of spiritual
midwife that is capable of
drawing us toward knowledge,
both knowledge of ourselves and
knowledge of the world. It is the
primary determinant of a persons
ethics, possibilities, and fate.
At root, in Schelers view, to
be human is not to be a thinking
thing as the French philosopher
Descartes said in the 17th century,
but a being who loves. 

Philosophy is a lovedetermined movement toward
participation in
the essential reality
of all possibles.
Max Scheler

A spiritual midwife
It is love, Scheler believes, that
makes things apparent to our
experience and that makes
See also: Plato 5055



Blaise Pascal 12425



Edmund Husserl 22425

THE MODERN WORLD 241

ONLY AS AN INDIVIDUAL
CAN MAN BECOME
AKARLPHILOSOPHER
JASPERS (18831969)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
1800s Sren Kierkegaard
writes of philosophy as a
matter of the individuals
struggle with truth.
1920s Martin Heidegger
claims that philosophy is a
matter of our relationship with
our own existence.
1920s Friedrich Nietzsche
says that God is dead, there
are no absolute truths, and we
must rethink all our values.
AFTER
From 1940 Hannah Arendts
ideas of freedom are inuenced
by Jaspers philosophy.
From 1950 Hans-Georg
Gadamer explores the idea
that philosophy progresses
through a fusion of individual
perspectives.

F

or some, philosophy is a
way to discover objective
truths about the world.
For German philosopher and
psychiatrist Karl Jaspers, on the
other hand, philosophy is a personal
struggle. Strongly inuenced by
the philosophers Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche, Jaspers is an existentialist
who suggests that philosophy is
a matter of our own attempts to
realize truth. Since philosophy is an
individual struggle, he writes in his

1941 book On my Philosophy, we
can philosophize only as individuals.
We cannot turn to anybody else to
tell us the truth; we must discover
it for ourselves, by our own efforts.

A community of individuals
Although in this sense truth is
something that we realize alone,
it is in communication with others
that we realize the fruits of our
efforts and raise our consciousness
beyond its limits. Jaspers considers
his own philosophy true only so
far as it aids communication with
others. And while other people
cannot provide us with a form of
ready-made truth, philosophy
remains a collective endeavor. For
Jaspers, each individuals search
for truth is carried out in community
with all those companions in
thought who have undergone
the same personal struggle. 
The philosopher lives in the invisible
realm of the spirit, struggling to realize
truth. The thoughts of other, companion,
philosophers act as signposts towards
potential paths to understanding.

See also: Sren Kierkegaard 19495  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421  Martin
Heidegger 25255  Hans-Georg Gadamer 26061  Hannah Arendt 272

242

LIFE IS A SERIES
OF COLLISIONS
WITH THE FUTURE
JOSE ORTEGA Y GASSET (18831955)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ontology
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
1641 In his Meditations, Ren
Descartes argues that there
are two worlds: the world of
mind and the world of matter.
Early 1900s Edmund Husserl
establishes phenomenology. He
claims that philosophers must
look at the world anew, putting
all preconceptions aside.
AFTER
1920s Martin Heidegger
explores questions about what
our existence means for us,
citing Ortega as an inuence.
1930s onward Ortegas
philosophy becomes popular
in Spain and Latin America,
inuencing philosophers
Xavier Zubiri, Jos Gaos,
Ignacio Ellacura, and Mara
Zambrano, among others.

O

rtega y Gassets philosophy
is about life. He is not
interested in analyzing the
world in a cool and detached fashion.
Instead, he wants to explore how
philosophy can engage creatively
with life. Reason, Ortega believes,
is not something passive, but
something activesomething that
allows us to get to grips with the
circumstances in which we nd
ourselves, and allows us to change
our lives for the better.

In his Meditations on Quixote,
published in 1914, Ortega writes:
I am myself and my circumstances.
Descartes said that it was possible
to imagine ourselves as thinking
beings, and yet to doubt the
existence of the external world,
including our own bodies. But
Ortega says that it makes no sense
to see ourselves as separate from
the world. If we want to think
seriously about ourselves, we have
to see that we are always immersed

We are always immersed in
particular circumstances, such
as where we live, what we do,
and things we assume.

We can accept or reject these
circumstances, by imagining
new possibilities.

The new possibilities
collide with our current
circumstances.

Life is a series of
collisions with the future.

THE MODERN WORLD 243
See also: Ren Descartes 11623  Immanuel Kant 16471  Edmund Husserl
22425  Martin Heidegger 25255  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

in particular circumstances
circumstances that are often
oppressive and limiting. These
limitations are not only those of
our physical surroundings, but also
of our thoughts, which contain
prejudices, and our behavior, which
is shaped by habit.
While many people live without
reecting on the nature of their
circumstances, Ortega says that
philosophers should not only strive
to understand their circumstances
better, they should actively seek
to change them. Indeed, he claims
that the philosophers duty is to
expose the assumptions that
lie behind all our beliefs.

The energy of life
In order to transform the world and
to engage creatively with our own
existence, Ortega says that we
must look at our lives with fresh
eyes. This means not only looking
anew at our external circumstances,
but also looking inside ourselves to
reconsider our beliefs and prejudices.
Only when we have done this will
we be able to commit ourselves to
creating new possibilities.

Every act of hope, such as celebrating
Christmas on the front line in World
War I, is a testament to our ability
to overcome our circumstances. For
Ortega, this is vital reason in action.

I am myself and
my circumstances.
Jos Ortega y Gasset
Jos Ortega y Gasset

However, there is a limit to the
amount that we can change the
world. Our habitual thinking runs
deep, and even if we free ourselves
enough to imagine new possibilities
and new futures, our external
circumstances may stand in the
way of realizing these possibilities.
The futures that we imagine will
always collide with the reality of
the circumstances in which we
nd ourselves. This is why Ortega
sees life as a series of collisions
with the future.
Ortegas idea is challenging
on both a personal and a political
level. It reminds us that we have
a duty to attempt to change our
circumstances, even though we
may encounter difculties in doing
so, and even though our attempts
may not always succeed. In The
Revolt of the Masses, he warns that
democracy carries within it the
threat of tyranny by the majority,
and that to live by majority ruleto
live like everyone elseis to live
without a personal vision or moral
code. Unless we engage creatively
with our own lives, we are hardly
living at all. This is why for Ortega,
reason is vitalit holds the energy
of life itself. 

Jos Ortega y Gasset was
born in Madrid, Spain, in 1883.
He studied philosophy rst
in Madrid, then at various
German universitieswhere
he became inuenced by the
philosophy of Immanuel
Kantbefore settling in Spain
as a university professor.
Throughout his life, Ortega
earned a living not only as a
philosopher but as a journalist
and essayist. He was also
actively engaged in Spanish
politics in the 1920s and
1930s, but his involvement
came to an end with the
outbreak of the Spanish Civil
War in 1936. Ortega then
went into exile in Argentina,
where he stayed, disillusioned
with politics, until 1945.
After three years in Portugal,
he returned to Madrid in
1948, where he founded the
Institute of Humanities. He
continued working as a
philosopher and journalist
for the remainder of his life.
Key works
1914 Meditations on Quixote
1925 The Dehumanization
of Art
1930 The Revolt of the Masses
1935 History as a System
1957 What is Philosophy?

244

TO PHILOSOPHIZE,
FIRST ONE MUST
CONFESS
HAJIME TANABE (18851962)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
5th century BCE Socrates
claims that he is wise because
he knows he is ignorant.
4th century St. Augustine
of Hippo writes Confessions,
which is both an autobiography
and a work of philosophy.

B

efore you read on, confess!
This may seem like a
strange idea, but it is one
that Japanese philosopher Tanabe
Hajime wants us to take seriously.
If we want to philosophize, Tanabe
believes, we cannot do so without
making a confession. But what is it
that we should confess, and why?

asking
deeper questions about life.

Early 13th century Buddhist
monk Shinran claims that
salvation is only possible
through other power.
1920s Martin Heidegger
writes that philosophy is a
matter of our relationship
with our own being.
AFTER
1990s Jacques Derrida,
inuenced by phenomenology,
explores themes such as
confession and forgiveness.

To answer these questions, we
need to look at the roots of Tanabes
philosophy in both the European
and the Japanese traditions of
philosophy. In terms of its European
roots, Tanabe traces his thought
back to the Greek philosopher
Socrates who lived in the 5th
century BCE. Socrates is important

To do this,
we need to
admit that
...our powers of
reason are limited.

...we do not know
the answers.

In order
to philosophize,
rst one must
confess.

THE MODERN WORLD 245
See also: Siddharta Gautama 3033  Socrates 4649
Martin Heidegger 25255  Jacques Derrida 30813

The Buddha Amitabha, here shown
between Kannon (Compassion) and
Seishi (Wisdom), is the principal buddha
of the Pure Land school of Buddhism,
to which Shinran belonged.

to Tanabe because of the way he
frankly confessed that he knew
nothing. According to the story, the
oracle at Delphi said that Socrates
was the wisest man in Athens, and
Socrates, who was certain of his
own ignorance, set out to prove the
oracle wrong. After innumerable
conversations with people in Athens,
he came to the conclusion that he
was indeed the wisest person in
the city, because he alone could
accept that he knew nothing.

Hajime Tanabe
Hajime Tanabe was born in
Tokyo, Japan, in 1885. After
studying at Tokyo University,
he was appointed associate
professor of philosophy at Kyoto
University, where he was an
active member of what became
known as the Kyoto School
of philosophy. In the 1920s,
he spent time in Germany
studying with the philosophers
Edmund Husserl and Martin
Heidegger, and after his return



St. Augustine of Hippo 7273

The Japanese roots of Tanabes
idea go back to the thought of the
Buddhist monk Shinran, who
belonged to what is known as the
Pure Land school of Buddhism.
Shinrans innovation was his claim
that enlightenment is impossible if
we rely on our own power. Instead,
we must confess our own ignorance
and limitations, so that we are open
to what both Shinran and Tanabe
call tariki, or other power. In the
context of Pure Land Buddhism,
this other power is that of the
Buddha Amitabha. In the context
of Tanabes philosophy, confession
leads to a recognition of absolute
nothingness, and ultimately to
self-awakening and wisdom.

Forsaking ourselves
For Tanabe, then, philosophy is
not about discussing the ner
points of logic, or about arguing
or debating anythingit is not,
in fact, an intellectual discipline.
For Tanabe, it is something much
more fundamentala process of
relating, in the deepest possible
sense, to our very own beingan
idea that is partly shaped by his
reading of Martin Heidegger.
to Japan he was appointed to
the post of full professor. He
was deeply affected by World
War II, and when it ended in
1945 he retired from teaching
philosophy. Tanabes book
Philosophy as Metanoetics was
published a year later, in 1946.
After his retirement, Tanabe
dedicated the remainder of his
life to meditation and writing.
Key works
1946 Philosophy as Metanoetics



Edmund Husserl 22425



For a problem
to belong to philosophy,
there must be something
inconceivable in it.
Hajime Tanabe

It is only through confessing,
Tanabe believes, that we can
rediscover our true beinga
process he describes in directly
religious terms as a form of death
and resurrection. This death and
resurrection is the rebirth of the
mind through other power, and
its passing from the limited view
of the self to the perspective of
enlightenment. However, this shift
is not simply a preparation for
philosophyon the contrary, it is
the very work of philosophy itself,
which is rooted in scepticism and
the forsaking of ourselves to the
grace of other power. Philosophy,
in other words, is not an activity
that we engage in, but something
that happens through us when we
gain access to our true selves by
letting go of the selfa phenomenon
that Tanabe calls action without
an acting subject.
Continual confession is, Tanabe
writes, the ultimate conclusion
to which the recognition of our
limitations drives us. In other
words, Tanabe asks us not to nd
new answers to old philosophical
questions, but to re-evaluate the
very nature of philosophy. 

THE LIMITS OF MY

LANGUAGE
ARE THE LIMITS OF MY

WORLD
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN (18891951)

248 LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of language
APPROACH
Logic

Language is
made up of propositions:
assertions about things,
which may be true or false.

The world is
made up of facts:
things are a certain way.

BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
sets the foundations of logic.
Late 19th century Gottlob
Frege develops the foundations
of modern logic.

Propositions are pictures
of facts, in the same way that
maps are pictures of the world.

Early 20th century Bertrand
Russell develops notation that
translates natural language
into logical propositions.
AFTER
1920s Ideas in the Tractatus
are used by philosophers of the
Vienna Circle, such as Moritz
Schlick and Rudolf Carnap, to
develop Logical Positivism.
From 1930 Wittgenstein
rejects the ideas expressed in
the Tractatus, and begins to
explore very different ways
of viewing language.

W

ittgensteins Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus
is perhaps one of the
most forbidding texts in the history
of 20th-century philosophy. Only
around 70 pages long in its English
translation, the book is made up of
a series of highly condensed and
technical numbered remarks.
In order to appreciate the full
signicance of the Tractatus, it
is important to set it within its
philosophical context. The fact
that Wittgenstein is talking about
the limits of my language and my
world sets him rmly within the

Any proposition that
does not picture facts
is meaninglessfor
example killing is bad.

My language is
therefore limited
to statements of facts
about the world.

The limits of my language
are the limits of my world.

philosophical tradition that stems
from the 18th-century German
philosopher Immanuel Kant. In
The Critique of Pure Reason, Kant
set out to explore the limits of
knowledge by posing questions
such as What can I know? and
What things will lie forever outside
of human understanding? One
reason that Kant asked such
questions was that he believed
many problems in philosophy arose
because we fail to recognize the
limitations of human understanding.
By turning our attention back onto
ourselves and asking about the

necessary limits of our knowledge,
we can then either resolve, or even
perhaps dissolve, nearly all of the
philosophical problems of the past.
The Tractatus tackles the same
kind of task that Kant did, but does
so in a far more radical fashion.
Wittgenstein states that he is
setting out to make clear what can
be meaningfully said. In much the
same way that Kant strives to set
the limits of reason, Wittgenstein
wants to set the limits of language
and, by implication, of all thought.
He does this because he suspects
that a great deal of philosophical

THE MODERN WORLD 249
See also: Aristotle 5663



Immanuel Kant 16471

The solution of
the problem of life is
seen in the vanishing
of the problem.
Ludwig Wittgenstein

discussion and disagreement is
based on some fundamental errors
in how we go about thinking and
talking about the world.

Logical structure
For all of their apparent complexity,
Wittgensteins central ideas in
the Tractatus are essentially based
on a fairly simple principle, that
both language and the world are
formally structured, and that
these structures can be broken
down into their component parts.
Wittgenstein attempts to lay bare
the structures both of the world
and of language, and then to show
the way they relate to each other.
Having done this, he attempts to
draw a number of wide-reaching
philosophical conclusions.
If we are to understand what
Wittgenstein means when he says
that limits of my language are the
limits of my world, we need to ask
what he means by the words
The ancient Egyptians arranged
symbols and stylized images of objects
in the world, known as hieroglyphs,
into logically structured sequences
to create a form of written language.



Gottlob Frege 336



Bertrand Russell 23639

world and language, because
he does not use these words in the
everyday sense we might expect.
When he talks about language,
the debt Wittgenstein owes to
the British philosopher Bertrand
Russell becomes apparent. For
Russell, who was an important
gure in the development of
philosophical logic, everyday
language was inadequate for
talking clearly and precisely about
the world. He believed that logic
was a perfect language, which
excluded all traces of ambiguity, so
he developed a way of translating
everyday language into what he
considered a logical form.
Logic is concerned with what are
known in philosophy as propositions.
We can think of propositions as
assertions that it is possible for us
to consider as being either true or
false. For example, the statement
the elephant is very angry is a
proposition, but the word elephant
is not. According to Wittgensteins



Rudolf Carnap 257

Tractatus, meaningful language
must consist solely of propositions.
The totality of propositions, he
writes, is language.
Knowing a little about what
Wittgenstein means by language,
we can now explore what he means
by the world. The Tractatus
begins with the claim that the
world is all that is the case. This
might appear to be straightforward
and robustly matter-of-fact, but
taken on its own, it is not entirely
clear what Wittgenstein means by
this statement. He goes on to write
that the world is the totality of
facts, not of things. Here we can
see a parallel between the way that
Wittgenstein treats language and
the way he is treating the world. It
may be a fact, for example, that the
elephant is angry, or that there is
an elephant in the room, but an
elephant just by itself is not a fact.
From this point, it begins to
become clear how the structure
of language and that of the world 

250 LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN

Logic is not
a body of doctrine
but a mirror-image
of the world.
Ludwig Wittgenstein

A digital image, although not the
same sort of object as the one it depicts,
has the same logical form. Words only
represent reality for Wittgenstein if,
again, both have the same logical form.

might be related. Wittgenstein says
that language pictures the world.
He formulated this idea during
World War I, when he read in a
newspaper about a court case in
Paris. The case concerned a
car accident, and the events were
re-enacted for those present in
court using model cars and model
pedestrians to represent the cars
and pedestrians in the real world.
The model cars and the model
pedestrians were able to depict
their counterparts, because they
were related to each other in
exactly the same way as the real
cars and real pedestrians involved
in the accident. Similarly, all the
elements depicted on a map are
related to each other in exactly
the same way as they are in the
landscape that the map represents.
What a picture shares with that
which it is depicting, Wittgenstein
says, is a logical form.
It is important here to realize
that we are talking about logical
pictures, and not about visual
pictures. Wittgenstein presents a
useful example to show what he

means. The sound waves generated
by a performance of a symphony,
the score of that symphony, and the
pattern formed by the grooves on
a gramophone recording of the
symphony all share between them
the same logical form. Wittgenstein
states, A picture is laid against
reality like a measure. In this way
it can depict the world.
Of course, our picture may be
incorrect. It may not agree with
reality, for example, by appearing to
show that the elephant is not angry
when the elephant is, in fact, very
angry. There is no middle ground
here for Wittgenstein. Because he
starts with propositions that are,
by their very nature, true or false,
pictures also are either true or false.
Language and the world, then,
both have a logical form; and
language can speak about the
world by picturing the world, and
picturing it in a fashion that agrees
with reality. It is at this point that
Wittgensteins idea gets really
interesting, and it is here that we
can see why Wittgenstein is
interested in the limits of language.

Consider the following idea: You
should give half of your salary to
charity. This is not picturing
anything in the world in the sense
meant by Wittgenstein. What can
be saidwhat Wittgenstein calls
the totality of true propositions
is merely the sum of all those
things that are the case, or the
natural sciences.
Discussion about religious and
ethical values is, for Wittgenstein,
strictly meaningless. Because the
things that we are attempting to
talk about when we discuss such
topics are beyond the limits of the
world, they also lie beyond the
limits of our language. Wittgenstein
writes, It is clear that ethics cannot
be put into language.

Beyond words
Some readers of Wittgenstein,
at this point, claim that he is a
champion of the sciences, driving
out vague concepts involved in talk
of ethics, religion, and the like. But
something more complex is going
on. Wittgenstein does not think
that the problems of life are

THE MODERN WORLD 251

What we cannot
speak about we
must pass
over in silence.
Ludwig Wittgenstein

was fearless in following his
argument to its conclusion,
ultimately recognizing that the
answer to such a question must be
yes. Anybody who understands the
Tractatus properly, he claims, will
eventually see that the propositions
used in it are nonsense, too. They
are like the steps of a philosophical
ladder that helps us to climb
altogether beyond the problems of
philosophy, but which we can kick
away once we have ascended.

Ludwig Wittgenstein
Change of direction
nonsensical. Instead, he believes
that these are the most important
problems of all. It is simply that
they cannot be put into words,
and because of this, they cannot
become a part of philosophy.
Wittgenstein writes that these
things, even though we cannot
speak of them, nevertheless make
themselves manifest, adding that
they are what is mystical.
All of this, however, has serious
repercussions for the propositions
that lie within the Tractatus itself.
After all, these are not propositions
that picture the world. Even logic,
one of Wittgensteins major tools,
does not say anything about the
world. Is the Tractatus, therefore,
nonsense? Wittgenstein himself

After completing the Tractatus,
Wittgenstein concluded that
there were no more philosophical
problems left to resolve, and so
abandoned the discipline. However,
over the course of the 1920s and
1930s, he began to question his
earlier thinking, becoming one of
its ercest critics. In particular, he
questioned his once rmly held
belief that language consists
solely of propositions, a view that
ignores much of what we do in our
everyday speechfrom telling
jokes, to cajoling, to scolding.
Nevertheless, despite all of its
problems, the Tractatus remains
one of the most challenging and
compelling works of Western
philosophyand ultimately one
of the most mysterious. 

Philosophy demands logical, unambiguous
language. Wittgenstein concludes, therefore, that it
can only be made up of propositions, or statements
of fact, such as the cat sat on the mat, which can
be clearly divided into their component parts.

Born into a wealthy Viennese
family in 1889, Wittgenstein
rst studied engineering and
in 1908 traveled to England
to continue his education in
Manchester. However, he soon
developed an interest in logic,
and by 1911 had moved to
Cambridge to study under the
philosopher Bertrand Russell.
During World War I, he
served on the Russian front
and in Italy, where he was
taken prisoner. Around this
time, he began the Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus, which
was published in 1921.
Believing that the Tractatus
resolved all the problems of
philosophy, Wittgenstein now
embarked on an itinerant
career as a schoolteacher,
gardener, and architect. But
after developing criticisms of
his earlier ideas, he resumed
his work at Cambridge in
1929, becoming a professor
there in 1939. He died in 1951.
Key works

+

=

1921 Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus
1953 Philosophical
Investigations
1958 The Blue and
Brown Books
1977 Remarks on Colour

252

WE ARE OURSELVES
THE ENTITIES
TO BE ANALYZED

MARTIN HEIDEGGER (18891976)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ontology
APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Diogenes of Sinope
uses a plucked chicken to
parody Platos followers claim
that a human being is a
featherless biped.
190013 Edmund Husserl
proposes his phenomenological
theories and method in Logical
Investigations and Ideas I.
AFTER
1940s Jean-Paul Sartre
publishes Being and
Nothingness, which looks at
the connection between
being and human freedom.
1960 Hans-Georg Gadamers
Truth and Method, inspired by
Heidegger, explores the nature
of human understanding.

I

t is said that in ancient
Athens the followers of
Plato gathered one day to ask
themselves the following question:
What is a human being? After
a great deal of thought, they came
up with the following answer:
a human being is a featherless
biped. Everybody seemed content
with this denition until Diogenes
the Cynic burst into the lecture
hall with a live plucked chicken,
shouting, Behold! I present you
with a human being. After the
commotion had died down, the
philosophers reconvened and
rened their denition. A human
being, they said, is a featherless
biped with broad nails.

THE MODERN WORLD 253
See also: Plato 5055  Diogenes of Sinope 66  Edmund Husserl 22425  Hans-Georg Gadamer 26061
Ernst Cassirer 337  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871  Hannah Arendt 272  Richard Rorty 31419



Philosophy has always
asked deep questions
about Being.

The question of existence
never gets straightened out
except through existing itself.
Martin Heidegger
We need to ask these
questions by looking at
the being for whom
Being is an issue.

Us!

We ourselves are
the entities to
be analyzed.

experience of them. For example,
phenomenology would not look
directly at the question what is a
human being? but would instead
look at the question what is it like
to be human?

The human existence

This curious story from the history
of early philosophy shows the kinds
of difculties philosophers have
sometimes been faced with when
attempting to give abstract, general
denitions of what it is to be human.
Even without the intervention
of Diogenes, it seems clear that
describing ourselves as featherless
bipeds does not really capture much
of what it means to be human.

An insiders perspective
It is this questionhow we might
go about analyzing what it is to be
humanthat concerned the
philosopher Martin Heidegger.
When Heidegger came to answer
the question, he did so in a way

that was strikingly different from
many of his predecessors. Instead
of attempting an abstract denition
that looks at human life from the
outside, he attempts to provide a
much more concrete analysis of
being from what could be called
an insiders position. He says that
since we exist in the thick of
thingsin the midst of lifeif we
want to understand what it is to be
human, we have to do so by looking
at human life from within this life.
Heidegger was a student of
Husserl, and he followed Husserls
method of phenomenology. This
is a philosophical approach that
looks at phenomenahow things
appearthrough examining our

For Heidegger, this constitutes the
fundamental question of philosophy.
He was most interested in the
philosophical subject of ontology
(from the Greek word ontos,
meaning being), which looks at
questions about being or existence.
Examples of ontological questions
might be: what does it mean to say
that something exists? and what
are the different kinds of things
that exist? Heidegger wanted use
the question what is it like to be
human? as a way of answering
deeper questions about existence
in general.
In his book, Being and Time,
Heidegger claims that when other
philosophers have asked ontological
questions, they have tended to use
approaches that are too abstract
and shallow. If we want to know
what it means to say that something
exists, we need to start looking 

254 MARTIN HEIDEGGER

We should raise anew
the question of the
meaning of being.
Martin Heidegger

We try to make sense of the world
by engaging with projects and tasks
that lend life a unity. Being human,
Heidegger says, means to be immersed
in the day-to-day world.

at the question from the perspective
of those beings for whom being is
an issue. We can assume that
although cats, dogs, and toadstools
are beings, they do not wonder
about their being: they do not fret
over ontological questions; they do
not ask what does it mean to say
that something exists? But there
is, Heidegger points out, one being
that does wonder about these

things, and that is the human being.
In saying that we are ourselves the
entities to be analyzed, Heidegger is
saying that if we want to explore
questions of being, we have to start
with ourselves, by looking at what
it means for us to exist.

Being and time
When Heidegger asks about
the meaning of being, he is not
asking about abstract ideas, but
about something very direct and
immediate. In the opening pages of
his book, he says that the meaning
of our being must be tied up with
time; we are essentially temporal

beings. When we are born, we nd
ourselves in the world as if we had
been thrown here on a trajectory
we have not chosen. We simply nd
that we have come to exist, in an
ongoing world that pre-existed us,
so that at our birth we are presented
with a particular historical, material,
and spiritual environment. We
attempt to make sense of this world
by engaging in various pastimes
for example, we might learn Latin, or
attempt to nd true love, or decide
to build ourselves a house. Through
these time-consuming projects we
literally project ourselves toward
different possible futures; we dene
our existence. However, sometimes
we become aware that there is an
outermost limit to all our projects, a
point at which everything we plan
will come to an end, whether nished
or unnished. This point is the
point of our death. Death, Heidegger
says, is the outermost horizon of our
being: everything we can do or see
or think takes place within this
horizon. We cannot see beyond it.
Heideggers technical vocabulary
is famously difcult to understand,
but this is largely because he is
attempting to explore complex
philosophical questions in a concrete
or non-abstract way; he wants to
relate to our actual experience. To
say that the furthest horizon of our

THE MODERN WORLD 255
being is death is to say something
about what it is like to live a human
life, and it captures some idea of
what we are in a way that many
philosophical denitions
featherless biped or political
animal, for exampleoverlook.

Living authentically
It is to Heidegger that we owe the
philosophical distinction between
authentic and inauthentic existence.
Most of the time we are wrapped
up in various ongoing projects, and
forget about death. But in seeing
our life purely in terms of the
projects in which we are engaged,
we miss a more fundamental
dimension of our existence, and to
that extent, Heidegger says, we are
existing inauthentically. When we
become aware of death as the
ultimate limit of our possibilities, we
start to reach a deeper understanding
of what it means to exist.
For example, when a good friend
dies, we may look at our own lives
and realize that the various projects
which absorb us from day to day
feel meaningless, and that there is
a deeper dimension to life that is

All being is a being-towards-death,
but only humans recognize this. Our
lives are temporal, and it is only once
we realize this that we can live a
meaningful and authentic life.

Dying is not an event;
it is a phenomenon to be
understood existentially.
Martin Heidegger

Martin Heidegger
missing. And so we may nd
ourselves changing our priorities
and projecting ourselves toward
different futures.

A deeper language
Heideggers later philosophy
continues to tackle questions of
being, but it turns away from his
earlier, exacting approach to take
a more poetic look at the same
kinds of questions. Philosophy, he
comes to suspect, simply cannot
reect this deeply on our own
being. In order to ask questions
about human existence, we must
use the richer, deeper language of
poetry, which engages us in a way
that goes far beyond the mere
exchange of information.
Heidegger was one of the
20th centurys most inuential
philosophers. His early attempt to
analyze what it means to be
human, and how one might live an
authentic life, inspired philosophers
such as Sartre, Levinas, and
Gadamer, and contributed to the
birth of existentialism. His later,
more poetic, thinking has also had
a powerful inuence on ecological
philosophers, who believe it offers
a way of thinking about what it
means to be a human being
within a world under threat of
environmental destruction. 

Heidegger is acknowledged to
be one of the most important
philosophers of the 20th
century. He was born in 1889
in Messkirch, Germany, and
had early aspirations to be a
priest, but after coming across
the writings of Husserl he took
up philosophy instead. He
quickly became well known as
an inspirational lecturer, and
was nicknamed the magician
of Messkirch. In the 1930s he
became rector of Freiburg
University and a member of
the Nazi party. The extent and
nature of his involvement with
Nazism remains controversial,
as is the question of how far
his philosophy is implicated in
the ideologies of Nazism.
Heidegger spent the last
30 years of his life traveling
and writing, exchanging ideas
with friends such as Hannah
Arendt and the physicist
Werner Heisenberg. He died
in Freiburg in 1976, aged 86.
Key works
1927 Being and Time
193653 Overcoming
Metaphyics
195556 The Principle
of Reason
195557 Identity and
Difference

256

THE INDIVIDUALS ONLY
TRUE MORAL CHOICE IS
THROUGH SELF-SACRIFICE
FOR THE COMMUNITY
TETSURO WATSUJI (18891960)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
13th century Japanese
philosopher Dogen writes
about forgetting the self.
Late 19th century Friedrich
Nietzsche writes about the
inuence of climate on
philosophy; this idea becomes
important to Watsujis thought.
1927 Martin Heidegger
publishes Being and Time.
Watsuji goes on to rethink
Heideggers book in the light of
his ideas on climate.
AFTER
Late 20th century Japanese
philosopher Yuasa Yasuo
further develops Watsujis
ethics of community.

T

etsuro Watsuji was one of
the leading philosophers
in Japan in the early part
of the 20th century, and he wrote
on both Eastern and Western
philosophy. He studied in Japan and
Europe, and like many Japanese
philosophers of his time, his work
shows a creative synthesis of these
two very different traditions.

Forgetting the self
Watsujis studies of Western
approaches to ethics convinced him
that thinkers in the West tend to
take an individualistic approach to
human nature, and so also to ethics.
But for Watsuji, individuals can only
be understood as expressions of
their particular times, relationships,
and social contexts, which together
constitute a climate. He explores
the idea of human nature in terms
of our relationships with the wider

community, which form a network
within which we exist; Watsuji calls
this betweenness. For Watsuji
ethics is a matter not of individual
action, but of the forgetting or
sacrice of ones self, so that the
individual can work for the benet
of the wider community.
Watsujis nationalist ethics and
insistence on the superiority of the
Japanese race led to his fall from
favor following World War II,
although he later distanced himself
from these views. 

Samurai warriors often sacriced
their own lives in battle in order to save
the state, in an act of extreme loyalty
and self-negation that Watsuji called
kenshin, or absolute self-sacrice.
See also: Sren Kierkegaard 19495  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421 
Nishida Kitaro 33637  Hajime Tanabe 24445  Martin Heidegger 25255

THE MODERN WORLD 257

LOGIC IS THE LAST
SCIENTIFIC
INGREDIENT
OF
PHILOSOPHY
RUDOLF CARNAP (18911970)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
Logical positivism
BEFORE
1890 Gottlob Frege starts to
explore the logical structures
of language.
1921 Ludwig Wittgenstein
writes that philosophy is the
study of the limits of language.
AFTER
1930s Karl Popper proposes
that science works by means
of falsiability: no amount of
positive proofs can prove
something to be true, whereas
one negative result conrms
that a theory is incorrect.
1960s Thomas Kuhn explores
the social dimensions of
scientic progress,
undermining some of the
tenets of logical positivism.

O

ne of the problems for
20th-century philosophy
is determining a role for
philosophy given the success of the
natural sciences. This is one of the
main concerns of German-born
Rudolf Carnap in The Physical
Language as the Universal Language
of Science (1934), which suggests
that philosophys proper function
and its primary contribution to
scienceis the analysis and
clarication of scientic concepts.
Carnap claims that many
apparently deep philosophical
problemssuch as metaphysical
onesare meaningless, because
they cannot be proved or disproved
through experience. He adds that
they are also in fact pseudo-problems
caused by logical confusions in the
way we use language.

Logical language
Logical positivism accepts as true
only strictly logical statements that
can be empirically veried. For
Carnap, philosophys real task is
therefore the logical analysis of
language (in order to discover and

In logic,
there are no morals.
Rudolf Carnap

rule out those questions that are,
strictly speaking, meaningless), and
to nd ways of talking clearly and
unambiguously about the sciences.
Some philosophers, such as
Willard Quine and Karl Popper, have
argued that Carnaps standards for
what can be said meaningfully are
too exacting and present an idealized
view of how science operates,
which is not reected in practice.
Nevertheless, Carnaps reminder
that language can fool us into
seeing problems that are not really
there is an important one. 

See also: Gottlob Frege 336  Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651
Willard Van Orman Quine 27879  Thomas Kuhn 293



Karl Popper 26265



258

THE ONLY WAY OF
KNOWING A PERSON
IS TO LOVE THEM
WITHOUT
HOPE
WALTER BENJAMIN (18921940)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Frankfurt School
BEFORE
c.380 BCE Plato writes his
Symposium, considered the
rst sustained philosophical
account of love.
1863 The French writer
Charles Baudelaire explores
the idea of the neur, the
person who walks the city to
experience it.
AFTER
1955 Guy Debord establishes
psychogeography, the study
of the effects of geography
on an individuals emotions
and behavior.
1971 Italian novelist
Italo Calvino explores the
relationships between
cities and signs in his book
Invisible Cities.

T

he German philosopher
Walter Benjamin was an
afliate of the Frankfurt
School, a group of neo-Marxist
social theorists who explored the
signicance of mass culture and
communication. Benjamin was also
fascinated by the techniques of lm
and literature, and his 1926 essay
One-Way Street is an experiment in
literary construction. It is a
collection of observations
intellectual and empiricalthat
apparently occur to him as he walks
down an imaginary city street.

The construction of life
currently lies far more in
the hands of facts than
of convictions.
Walter Benjamin

In the essay Benjamin does not
set out a grand theory. Instead
he wants to surprise us with ideas,
in the same way that we might be
surprised by something catching
our eye while on a walk. Toward
the end of the essay, he says that
Quotations in my work are like
wayside robbers who leap out,
brandishing weapons, and relieve
the idler of his certainty.

Illuminating love
The idea that the only way of
knowing a person is to love them
hopelessly appears in the middle of
the essay, under the heading Arc
Lamp. In a are of light, Benjamin
pauses and thinks just this, and no
morethe essay moves immediately
afterward to a new section. We are
forced to guess what he means. Is
he saying that knowledge arises
out of love? Or that it is only when
we stop hoping for some outcome
that we can clearly see the beloved?
We cannot know. All we can do is
walk down the street alongside
Benjamin, experiencing the are of
light of these passing thoughts. 

See also: Plato 5055  Karl Marx 196203
Roland Barthes 29091



Theodor Adorno 26667



THE MODERN WORLD 259

THAT WHICH IS
CANNOT BE TRUE
HERBERT MARCUSE (18981979)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Frankfurt School
BEFORE
1820 Georg Hegel writes in
his Philosophy of Right that
what is actual is rational and
what is rational is actual.
1867 Karl Marx publishes
the rst volume of Das Kapital,
setting out his view of the
laws of motion within
capitalist societies, and
asserting that capitalism is
guilty of exploiting humans.
1940s Martin Heidegger
begins to explore the problems
of technology.
AFTER
2000 Slavoj iek explores
the relationship between
technology, capitalist society,
and totalitarianism.

t rst glance, nothing
seems to be more irrational
than Marcuses claim that
that which is cannot be true,
which appears in his 1941 book,
Reason and Revolution. If that
which is cannot be true, the reader
is tempted to ask, then what is? But
Marcuses idea is partly an attempt
to overturn the claim made by the
German philosopher Hegel that
what is rational is actual, and also
that what is actual is rational.
Marcuse believes this is a
dangerous idea because it leads us
to think that what is actually the
casesuch as our existing political
systemis necessarily rational.
He reminds us that those things
we take as reasonable may be far
more unreasonable than we like to
admit. He also wants to shake us
up into realizing the irrational
nature of many of the things that
we -take for granted.

A

harmony of freedom and oppression,
productivity and destruction,
growth and regression. We assume
that the societies we live in are
based upon reason and justice,
but when we look more closely, we
may nd that they are neither as
just nor as reasonable as we believe.
Marcuse is not discounting
reason, but trying to point out that
reason is subversive, and that we
can use it to call into question the
society in which we live. The aim
of philosophy, for Marcuse, is a
rationalist theory of society. 

Subversive reason

Fast cars are the kind of consumables
that Marcuse accuses us of using to
recognize ourselves; he says we nd
our soul in these items, becoming
mere extensions of the things we create.

In particular, Marcuse is deeply
uneasy with capitalist societies and
with what he calls their terrifying
See also: Georg Hegel 17885
25255  Slavoj iek 326



Karl Marx 196203



Martin Heidegger

260

HISTORY DOES NOT
BELONG TO US BUT
WE
BELONG
TO
IT
HANS-GEORG GADAMER (19002002)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of history
APPROACH
Hermeneutics
BEFORE
Early 19th century German
philosopher Friedrich
Schleiermacher lays the
groundwork for hermeneutics.
1890s Wilhelm Dilthey, a
German philosopher, describes
interpretation as taking place
in the hermeneutic circle.
1927 Martin Heidegger
explores the interpretation
of being, in Being and Time.
AFTER
1979 Richard Rorty uses
a hermeneutic approach in
his book Philosophy and the
Mirror of Nature.
198385 French philosopher
Paul Ricoeur writes Time
and Narrative, examining
the capacity of narrative to
represent our feeling of time.

G

adamer is associated in
particular with one form of
philosophy: hermeneutics.
Derived from the Greek word
hermeneuo, meaning interpret,
this is the study of how humans
interpret the world.
Gadamer studied philosophy
under Martin Heidegger, who said
that the task of philosophy is to
interpret our existence. This
interpretation is always a process
of deepening our understanding by
starting from what we already
know. The process is similar to how
we might interpret a poem. We start

We understand
the world through
interpretation.

History does
not belong
to us, but we
belong to it.

by reading it carefully in the light
of our present understanding. If
we come to a line that seems strange
or particularly striking, we might
need to reach for a deeper level of
understanding. As we interpret
individual lines, our sense of the
poem as a whole might begin to
change; and as our sense of the
poem as a whole changes, so might
our understanding of individual
lines. This is known as the
hermeneutic circle.
Heideggers approach to
philosophy moved in this circular
fashion, and this was the approach

This always takes place within
a particular historical era,
which gives us particular
prejudices and biases.

We cannot understand
things outside of these
prejudices and biases.

THE MODERN WORLD 261
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471  Georg Hegel 17885
Jacques Derrida 30813  Richard Rorty 31419

When viewing historical objects
we should not view time as a gulf to
be bridged, says Gadamer. Its distance
is lled with the continuity of tradition,
which sheds light on our understanding.

that Gadamer later explored in his
book Truth and Method. Gadamer
goes on to point out that our
understanding is always from the
point of view of a particular point in
history. Our prejudices and beliefs,
the kinds of questions that we

Hans-Georg Gadamer



Martin Heidegger 25255

think are worth asking, and the
kinds of answers with which we
are satised are all the product
of our history. We cannot stand
outside of history and culture, so
we can never reach an absolutely
objective perspective.
But these prejudices should not
be seen as a bad thing. They are,
after all, our starting point, and our
current understanding and sense
of meaning are based upon these
prejudices and biases. Even if it
were possible to get rid of all our
prejudices, we would not nd that
we would then see things clearly.
Without any given framework for
interpretation, we would not be
able to see anything at all.

Conversing with history
Gadamer sees the process of
understanding our lives and our
selves as similar to having a
conversation with history. As
we read historical texts that have
existed for centuries, the differences
in their traditions and assumptions
reveal our own cultural norms and
prejudices, leading us to broaden
Gadamer was born in Marburg
in 1900, but grew up in Breslau,
Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
He studied philosophy rst in
Breslau and then in Marburg,
where he wrote a second doctoral
dissertation under the tutelage of
the philosopher Martin Heidegger,
who was an enormous inuence
on his work. He became an
associate professor at Marburg,
beginning a long academic career
which eventually included
succeeding the philosopher Karl
Jaspers as Professor of Philosophy
in Heidelberg in 1949. His most
important book, Truth and



Jrgen Habermas 30607



and deepen our understanding
of our own lives in the present.
For instance, if I pick up a book by
Plato, and read it carefully, I might
nd not only that I am deepening
my understanding of Plato, but also
that my own prejudices and biases
become clear, and perhaps begin to
shift. Not only am I reading Plato,
but Plato is reading me. Through
this dialogue, or what Gadamer
calls the fusion of horizons, my
understanding of the world reaches
a deeper, richer level. 

Because an experience
is itself within the whole
of life, the whole of life
is present in it too.
Hans-Georg Gadamer

Method, was published when
he was 60. It attacked the idea
that science offered the only
route to truth and its publication
brought him wider international
fame. A sociable and lively man,
Gadamer remained active right
up until his death in Heidelberg
at the age of 102.
Key works
1960 Truth and Method
1976 Philosophical Hermeneutics
1980 Dialogue and Dialectic
1981 Reason in the Age of
Science

262

IN SO FAR AS
A SCIENTIFIC
STATEMENT SPEAKS
ABOUT REALITY,
IT MUST BE
FALSIFIABLE
KARL POPPER (19021994)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
stresses the importance of
observation and measurement
to understanding the world.
1620 Francis Bacon sets
out the inductive methods of
science in Novum Organum.

1748 David Humes
Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding raises the
problem of induction.
AFTER
1962 Thomas Kuhn criticizes
Popper in The Structure of
Scientic Revolutions.

1978 Paul Feyerabend, in
Against Method, questions the
very idea of scientic method.

W

e often think that science
works by proving
truths about the world.
We might imagine that a good
scientic theory is one that we
can prove conclusively to be true.
The philosopher Karl Popper,
however, insists that this is not the
case. Instead, he says that what
makes a theory scientic is that it
is capable of being falsied, or being
shown to be wrong by experience.
Popper is interested in the
method by which science nds out
about the world. Science depends
on experiment and experience, and
if we want to do science well, we
need to pay close attention to what
philosopher David Hume called

THE MODERN WORLD 263
See also: Socrates 4649  Aristotle 5663
Thomas Kuhn 293  Paul Feyerabend 297

Scientic understanding
S
works by induction.

But these principles
cant be proved, only
disproved (such as by the
sighting of a black swan).



Francis Bacon 11011



David Hume 14853

Rudolf Carnap 257



This means working from
particular observations
(such as every swan
I see is white)...

... and moving to general
principles (such as all
swans are white).

In so far as
a scientic statement
speaks about reality, it
must be falsiable.

the regularities of naturethe fact
that events unfold in the world in
particular patterns and sequences
that can be systematically explored.
Science, in other words, is empirical,
or based on experience, and to
understand how it works we need
to understand how experience in
general leads to knowledge.
Consider the following statement:
If you drop a tennis ball from a
second-oor window, it will fall to
the ground. Leaving aside any
chance events (such as the ball
being snatched away by a passing
eagle), we can be fairly sure that
this claim is a reasonable one. It
would be a strange person who
said, Hold on, are you sure it will



fall to the ground? But how do we
know that this is what will happen
when we drop the tennis ball?
What kind of knowledge is this?
The short answer is that we
know it will fall because that is
what it always does. Leaving aside
chance events, no-one has ever
found that a tennis ball hovers or
rises upward when it is released.
We know it falls to the ground
because experience has shown us
that this will happen. And not only
can we be sure that the ball will fall
to the ground, we can also be sure
about how it will fall to the ground.
For example, if we know the force of
gravity, and how high the window
is above the ground, we can

Black swans were rst encountered
by Europeans in the 17th century.
This falsied the idea that all swans
are white, which at the time was held
to be universally true.

calculate the speed at which the
ball will fall. Nothing about the
event is even remotely mysterious.
Nevertheless, the question
remains: can we be certain that the
next time we drop the ball it will
fall to the ground? No matter how
often we conduct the experiment,
and no matter how condent we
become about its outcome, we can
never prove that the result will be
the same in the future.

Inductive reasoning
This inability to speak with any
certainty about the future is called
the problem of induction, and it
was rst recognized by Hume
in the 18th century. So what is
inductive reasoning?
Induction is the process of
moving from a set of observed facts
about the world to more general
conclusions about the world. We
expect that if we drop the ball it
will fall to the ground because, at
least according to Hume, we are
generalizing from innumerable 

264 KARL POPPER
experiences of similar occasions
on which we have found things
like balls to fall to the ground
when we release them.

Deductive reasoning
Another form of reasoning,
which philosophers contrast with
induction, is deductive reasoning.
While induction moves from the
particular case to the general,
deduction moves from the general
case to the particular. For instance,
a piece of deductive reasoning might
start from two premises, such as:
If it is an apple, then it is a fruit
(since all apples are fruit) and
This is an apple. Given the nature
of these premises, the statement
This is an apple leads inescapably
to the conclusion It is a fruit.
Philosophers like to simplify
deductive arguments by writing
them out in notation. So the general
form of the argument above would
be If P then Q; since P,therefore
Q. In our example, P stands for
It is an apple, and Q stands for
An example of the
problem of induction is
that no matter how reliably
a tennis ball behaves in
the present, we can never
know for certain how it
will behave in the future.

48

It is a fruit. Given the starting
points If P then Q and P, then
the conclusion Q is necessary, or
unavoidably true. Another example
would be: If it is raining, the cat
will meow (since all cats meow
in the rain). It is raining, therefore
the cat will meow.
All arguments of this kind are
considered by philosophers to be
valid arguments, because their
conclusions follow inevitably from
their premises. However, the fact
that an argument is valid does not
mean that its conclusions are true.
For example, the argument If it is
a cat, then it is banana-avored;
this is a cat, therefore it is bananaavored is valid, because it follows
a valid form. But most people would
agree that the conclusion is false.
And a closer look shows that there
is a problem, from an empirical
perspective, with the premise If it
is a cat, then it is banana-avored,
because cats, in our world at least,
are not banana-avored. In other
words, because the premise is

Every solution to a
problem creates new
unsolved problems.
Karl Popper

untrue, even though the argument
itself is valid, the conclusion is
also untrue. Other worlds can be
imagined in which cats are in fact
banana-avored, and for this reason
the statement that cats
are not banana-avored is said to
be contingently true, rather than
logically or necessarily true, which
would demand that it be true in
all possible worlds. Nevertheless,
arguments that are valid and have
true premises are called sound

Experiment B

Experiment A

Experiment C

48
66

66

?

?

THE MODERN WORLD 265

Science may be described
as the art of systematic
over-simplication.
Karl Popper

arguments. The banana-avored
cat argument, as we have seen,
is valid but not soundwhereas
the argument about apples and
fruit is both valid and sound.

Falsiability
Deductive arguments could be said
to be like computer programsthe
conclusions they reach are only as
good as the data that is fed into
them. Deductive reasoning has
an important role to play in the
sciences, but on its own, it cannot
say anything about the world. It
can only say If this is the case,
then that is the case. And if we
want to use such arguments in the

Karl Popper

sciences, we still have to rely on
induction for our premises, and
so science is lumbered with the
problem of induction.
For this reason, according to
Popper, we cannot prove our
theories to be true. Moreover, what
makes a theory scientic is not that
it can be proved at all, but that it
can be tested against reality and
shown to be potentially false. In
other words, a falsiable theory
is not a theory that is false, but
one that can only be shown to be
false by observation.
Theories that are untestable (for
example, that we each have an
invisible spirit guide, or that God
created the universe) are not part
of the natural sciences. This does
not mean that they are worthless,
only that they are not the kinds of
theories that the sciences deal with.
The idea of falsiability does not
mean we are unjustied in having
a belief in theories that cannot be
falsied. Beliefs that stand up to
repeated testing, and that resist
our attempts at falsication, can be
taken to be reliable. But even the
best theories are always open to
the possibility that a new result
will show them to be false.
Karl Popper was born in Vienna,
Austria, in 1902. He studied
philosophy at the University of
Vienna, after which he spent six
years as a schoolteacher. It was
during this time that he published
The Logic of Scientic Discovery,
which established him as one
of the foremost philosophers of
science. In 1937, he emigrated
to New Zealand, where he lived
until the end of World War II,
and where he wrote his study of
totalitarianism, The Open Society
and Its Enemies. In 1946, he moved
to England to teach, rst at the
London School of Economics, then

Experiments can show that certain
phenomena reliably follow others in
nature. But Popper claims that no
experiment can ever verify a theory,
or even show that it is probable.

Poppers work has not been without
its critics. Some scientists claim
that he presents an idealized view
of how they go about their work,
and that science is practiced very
differently from how Popper
suggests. Nevertheless, his
idea of falsiability is still used in
distinguishing between scientic
and non-scientic claims, and
Popper remains perhaps the most
important philosopher of science
of the 20th century. 
at the University of London.
He was knighted in 1965, and
remained in England for the rest
of his life. Although he retired in
1969, he continued to write and
publish until his death in 1994.
Key works
1934 The Logic of Scientic
Discovery
1945 The Open Society and Its
Enemies
1957 The Poverty of Historicism
1963 Conjectures and
Refutations: The Growth of
Scientic Knowledge

266

INTELLIGENCE
IS A MORAL
CATEGORY
THEODOR ADORNO (19031969)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Frankfurt School
BEFORE
1st century CE Saint Paul
writes about being a fool
for Christ.
5001450 The idea of the
holy fool, who represents an
alternative view of the world,
becomes popular throughout
Medieval Europe.
20th century The global
rise of differing forms of
mass-media communication
raises new ethical questions.
AFTER
1994 Portuguese neuroscientist
Antonio Damasio publishes
Descartes Error: Emotion,
Reason, and the Human Brain.
21st century Slavoj iek
explores the political, social,
and ethical dimensions of
popular culture.

T

he idea of the holy fool has
a long tradition in the West,
dating all the way back to
Saint Pauls letter to the Corinthians
in which he asks his followers to be
fools for Christs sake. Throughout
the Middle Ages this idea was
developed into the popular cultural
gure of the saint or sage who was
foolish or lacked intelligence, but
who was morally good or pure.
In his book Minima Moralia, the
German philosopher Theodor Adorno
calls into question this long tradition.
He is suspicious of attempts to (as
he puts it) absolve and beatify the

blockhead, and wants to make the
case that goodness involves our
entire being, both our feeling and
our understanding.
The problem with the idea of
the holy fool, Adorno says, is that
it divides us into different parts,
and in doing so makes us incapable
of acting judiciously at all. In reality,
judgement is measured by the
extent to which we manage to
make feeling and understanding
cohere. Adornos view implies that
evil acts are not just failures of
feeling, but also failures of
intelligence and understanding.

Emotion

Intelligence

Both are needed for me
to make judgements about
what is right and wrong.

So to act morally I need to
be able to use my intelligence
as well as my emotions.

Intelligence is a
moral category.

THE MODERN WORLD 267
See also: Ren Descartes 11623
Slavoj iek 326



Georg Hegel 17885

Adorno was a member of the
Frankfurt School, a group of
philosophers who were interested
in the development of capitalism.
He condemned forms of mass
communication such as television
and radio, claiming that these
have led to the erosion of both
intelligence and feeling, and to a
decline in the ability to make moral
choices and judgements. If we
choose to switch off our brains
by watching blockbuster movies
(insofar as we can choose at all,
given the prevailing cultural
conditions in which we live), for
Adorno, this is a moral choice.
Popular culture, he believes, not
only makes us stupid; it also
makes us unable to act morally.

Essential emotions
Adorno believes that the opposite
error to that of imagining that there
might be such a thing as a holy fool
is imagining that we can judge on
intelligence alone, without emotion.
This might happen in a court of
law; judges have been known to
instruct the jury to put all emotion
to one side, so that they can come
to a cool and measured decision.

The power of judgement
is measured by the
cohesion of self.
Theodor Adorno



Karl Marx 196203 

Theodor Adorno
Lighthearted television is inherently
dangerous, says Adorno, because it
distorts the world and imbues us with
stereotypes and biases that we begin
to take on as our own.

But in Adornos view, we can no
more make wise judgements by
abandoning emotion than we can
by abandoning intelligence.
When the last trace of emotion
has been driven out of our thinking,
Adorno writes, we are left with
nothing to think about, and the idea
that intelligence might benet from
the decay of the emotions is simply
mistaken. For this reason Adorno
believes that the sciences, which
are a form of knowledge that do not
make reference to our emotions,
have, like popular culture, had a
dehumanizing effect upon us.
Unexpectedly, it may in fact be
the sciences that will ultimately
demonstrate the wisdom of
Adornos central concerns about
the severing of intelligence and
feeling. Since the 1990s, scientists
such as Antonio Damasio have
studied emotions and the brain,
providing increasing evidence of
the many mechanisms by which
emotions guide decision-making.
So if we are to judge wisely or even
to judge at all, we must employ both
emotion and intelligence. 

Born in 1903 in Frankfurt,
Theodor Adornos two
passions from an early age
were philosophy and music;
his mother and aunt were
both accomplished musicians.
At university Adorno studied
musicology and philosophy,
graduating in 1924. He had
ambitions to be a composer,
but setbacks in his musical
career led him increasingly
toward philosophy. One area
in which Adornos interests
converged was in his criticism
of the industry surrounding
popular culture, demonstrated
in his notorious essay On
Jazz, published in 1936.
In 1938, during the rise of
Nazism in Germany, Adorno
emigrated to New York, and
then moved to Los Angeles,
where he taught at the
University of California. He
returned to Germany after
the end of World War II, and
took up a professorship at
Frankfurt. Adorno died at the
age of 66 while on holiday in
Switzerland in 1969.
Key works
1949 Philosophy of New Music
1951 Minima Moralia
1966 Negative Dialectics
1970 Aesthetic Theory

268

EXISTENCE
PRECEDES
ESSENCE
JEAN-PAUL SARTRE (19051980)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
asks the question How should
we live?
1840S Sren Kierkegaard
writes Either/Or, exploring
the role played by choice in
shaping our lives.
1920S Martin Heidegger
says that what is important
is our relationship with our
own existence.
AFTER
1945 Sartres friend and
companion, Simone de
Beauvoir, publishes The
Second Sex, which applies
Sartres ideas to the question
of the relationship between
men and women.

S

ince ancient times, the
question of what it is to
be human and what makes
us so distinct from all other types
of being has been one of the main
preoccupations of philosophers.
Their approach to the question
assumes that there is such a thing
as human nature, or an essence of
what it is to be human. It also tends
to assume that this human nature
is xed across time and space. In
other words, it assumes that there
is a universal essence of what it is
to be human, and that this essence
can be found in every single human
that has ever existed, or will ever
exist. According to this view, all
human beings, regardless of their

THE MODERN WORLD 269
See also: Aristotle 5663  Sren Kierkegaard 19495  Martin Heidegger
25255  Simone de Beauvoir 27677  Albert Camus 28485

When we make something
we do so for a purpose.

There is no God.

The purpose (or essence)
of a made thing comes
before its existence.

We are not
made by God.

We are not made
for any purpose

so our existence
precedes our
essence.

circumstances, possess the same
fundamental qualities and are
guided by the same basic values.
For Sartre, however, thinking about
human nature in this way risks
missing what is most important
about human beings, and that is
our freedom.
To clarify what he means by
this, Sartre gives the following
illustration. He asks us to imagine
a paper-knifethe kind of knife
that might be used to open an
envelope. This knife has been made
by a craftsman who has had the
idea of creating such a tool, and
who had a clear understanding of
what is required of a paper-knife. It
needs to be sharp enough to cut

We have to create our
purpose for ourselves.

through paper, but not so sharp as
to be dangerous. It needs to be easy
to wield, made of an appropriate
substancemetal, bamboo, or
wood, perhaps, but not butter,
wax, or feathersand fashioned
to function efciently. Sartre says
that it is inconceivable for a paperknife to exist without its maker
knowing what it is going to be used
for. Therefore the essence of a
paper-knifeor all of the things
that make it a paper-knife and not
a steak knife or a paper airplane
comes before the existence of any
particular paper-knife.
Humans, of course, are not
paper-knives. For Sartre, there is
no preordained plan that makes 

Jean-Paul Sartre
Born in Paris, Sartre was just
15 months old when his father
died. Brought up by his mother
and grandfather, he proved a
gifted student, and gained
entry to the prestigious cole
Normale Suprieure. There he
met his lifelong companion
and fellow philosopher Simone
de Beauvoir. After graduation,
he worked as a teacher and
was appointed Professor of
Philosophy at the University
of Le Havre in 1931.
During World War II, Sartre
was drafted into the army and
briey imprisoned. After his
release in 1941, he joined the
resistance movement.
After 1945, Sartres writing
became increasingly political
and he founded the literary
and political journal Modern
Times. He was offered, but
declined, the Nobel Prize for
Literature in 1964. Such was
his inuence and popularity
that more than 50,000 people
attended his funeral in 1980.
Key works
1938 Nausea
1943 Being and Nothingness
1945 Existentialism and
Humanism
1960 Critique of Dialectical
Reason

270 JEAN-PAUL SARTRE
us the kind of beings that we are.
We are not made for any particular
purpose. We exist, but not because
of our purpose or essence like a
paper-knife does; our existence
precedes our essence.

Dening ourselves
This is where we begin to see the
connection between Sartres claim
that existence precedes essence
and his atheism. Sartre points out
that religious approaches to the
question of human nature often
work by means of an analogy with

human craftsmanshipthat
human nature in the mind of God
is analogous to the nature of the
paper-knife in the mind of the
craftsman who makes it. Even
many non-religious theories of
human nature, Sartre claims, still
have their roots in religious ways of
thinking, because they continue to
insist that essence comes before
existence, or that we are made for a
specic purpose. In claiming that
existence comes before essence,
Sartre is setting out a position that
he believes is more consistent with

The use or purpose of a tool, such
as a pair of scissors, dictates its
form. Humans, according to Sartre,
have no specic purpose, so are
free to shape themselves.

blades
to slice effortlessly
through any
material.

Ergonomically
designed handles
for a rm grip.

Precision-made
screw for a smooth
pivoting action.

his atheism. There is no universal,
xed human nature, he declares,
because no God exists who could
ordain such a nature.
Here Sartre is relying on a very
specic denition of human nature,
identifying the nature of something
with its purpose. He is rejecting the
concept of what philosophers call
teleology in human naturethat it
is something that we can think
about in terms of the purpose of
human existence. Nevertheless,
there is a sense in which Sartre is
offering a theory of human nature,
by claiming that we are the kinds
of beings who are compelled to
assign a purpose to our lives. With
no divine power to prescribe that
purpose, we must dene ourselves.
Dening ourselves, however, is
not just a matter of being able to
say what we are as human beings.
Instead, it is a matter of shaping
ourselves into whatever kind of
being we choose to become. This
is what makes us, at root, different
from all the other kinds of being
in the worldwe can become
whatever we choose to make of
ourselves. A rock is simply a rock;
a cauliower is simply a cauliower;
and a mouse is simply a mouse. But
human beings possess the ability
to actively shape themselves.

First of all man exists,
turns up, appears on the
scene, and only afterwards
denes himself.
Jean-Paul Sartre

THE MODERN WORLD 271
Sartres idea that we are free to shape
our own lives inuenced the students
that took to the streets of Paris in May
1968 to protest against the draconian
powers of the university authorities.

Because Sartres philosophy
releases us from the constraint of
a human nature that is preordained,
it is also one of freedom. We are free
to choose how to shape ourselves,
although we do have to accept
some limitations. No amount of
willing myself to grow wings, for
example, will ever cause that to
happen. But even within the range
of realistic choices we have, we
often nd that we are constrained
and simply make decisions based
upon habit, or because of the
way in which we have become
accustomed to see ourselves.
Sartre wants us to break free
of habitual ways of thinking, telling
us to face up to the implications of
living in a world in which nothing
is preordained. To avoid falling into
unconscious patterns of behavior, he
believes we must continually face
up to choices about how to act.

Responsible freedom
By making choices, we are also
creating a template for how we think
a human life ought to be. If I decide

As far as men go,
it is not what they are that
interests me, but what
they can become.
Jean-Paul Sartre

to become a philosopher, then I am
not just deciding for myself. I am
implicitly saying that being a
philosopher is a worthwhile activity.
This means that freedom is the
greatest responsibility of all. We
are not just responsible for the
impact that our choices have upon
ourselves, but also for their impact
on the whole of mankind. And,
with no external principles or rules
to justify our actions, we have
no excuses to hide behind for the
choices that we make. For this
reason, Sartre declares that we are
condemned to be free.
Sartres philosophy of linking
freedom with responsibility has
been labelled as pessimistic, but
he refutes that charge. Indeed, he
states that it is the most optimistic
philosophy possible, because
despite bearing responsibility for
the impact of our actions upon
others, we are able to choose to
exercise sole control over how we
fashion our world and ourselves.

Sartres ideas were particularly
inuential on the writings of his
companion and fellow philosopher
Simone de Beauvoir, but they also
had a marked impact on French
cultural and daily life. Young people
especially were thrilled by his call
to use their freedom to fashion
their existence. He inspired them
to challenge the traditionalist,
authoritarian attitudes that prevailed
in France in the 1950s and 1960s.
Sartre is cited as a key inuence
on the streets protests in Paris in
May 1968, which helped to bring
down the conservative government
and herald a more liberal climate
throughout France.
Engagement with political
issues was an important part
of Sartres life. His constantly
changing afliations, as well as
his perpetual movement between
politics, philosophy, and literature,
are themselves perhaps testament
to a life lived in the light of the idea
that existence precedes essence. 

272

THE BANALITY
OF EVIL
HANNAH ARENDT (19061975)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
c.350 St Augustine of Hippo
writes that evil is not a
force, but comes from a lack
of goodness.
1200s Thomas Aquinas
writes Disputed questions
on evil, exploring the idea of
evil as a lack of something,
rather than a thing in itself.
AFTER
1971 American social scientist
Philip Zimbardo conducts
the notorious Stanford Prison
Experiment in which ordinary
students are persuaded to
participate in evil acts that
would normally be considered
unthinkable both to themselves
and to others.

I

n 1961, the philosopher
Hannah Arendt witnessed the
trial of Adolph Eichmann, one
of the architects of the Holocaust.
In her book Eichmann in Jerusalem,
Arendt writes of the apparent
everydayness of Eichmann. The
gure before her in the dock did
not resemble the kind of monster
we might imagine. In fact, he
would not have looked out of place
in a caf or in the street.

A failure of judgement
After witnessing the trial, Arendt
came to the conclusion that evil
does not come from malevolence or
a delight in doing wrong. Instead,
she suggests, the reasons people
act in such ways is that they fall
victim to failures of thinking and
judgement. Oppressive political
systems are able to take advantage
of our tendencies toward such
failures, and can make acts that
we might usually consider to be
unthinkable seem normal.
The idea that evil is banal does
not strip evil acts of their horror.
Instead, refusing to see people
See also: St Augustine of Hippo 7273
Theodor Adorno 26667

Eichmann committed atrocities
not through a hatred of the Jewish
community, Arendt suggests, but
because he unthinkingly followed
orders, disengaging from their effects.

who commit terrible acts as
monsters, brings these acts
closer to our everyday lives,
challenging us to consider how
evil may be something of which
we are all capable. We should
guard against the failures of our
political regimes, says Arendt,
and the possible failures in our
own thinking and judgement. 


Thomas Aquinas 8895



THE MODERN WORLD 273

REASON LIVES
IN LANGUAGE
EMMANUEL LEVINAS (19061995)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
1920s Edmund Husserl
explores our relationship to
other human beings from a
phenomenological perspective.
1920s Austrian philosopher
Martin Buber claims that
meaning arises out of our
relationship with others.
AFTER
From 1960 Levinass work on
relationships inuences the
thoughts of French feminist
philosophers such as Luce
Irigaray and Julia Kristeva.
From 1970 Levinass ideas
on responsibility inuence
psychotherapy.
2001 Jacques Derrida explores
responsibility in relation to
humanitarian questions such
as political asylum.

L

evinass ideas are most easily
understood through looking
at an example. Imagine that
you are walking down a street on a
cold winter evening, and you see a
beggar huddled in a doorway. She
may not even be asking for change,
but somehow you cant help feeling
some obligation to respond to this
strangers need. You may choose
to ignore her, but even if you do,
something has already been
communicated to you: the fact that
this is a person who needs your help.

out of the face-to-face relationships
we have with other people. It is
because we are faced by the needs
of other human beings that we must
offer justications for our actions.
Even if you do not give your change
to the beggar, you nd yourself
having to justify your choice. 

Inevitable communication
Levinas was a Lithuanian Jew who
lived through the Holocaust. He says
that reason lives in language in
Totality and Innity (1961), explaining
that language is the way that we
communicate with others even
before we have started to speak.
Whenever I see the face of another
person, the fact that this is another
human being and that I have a
responsibility for them is instantly
communicated. I can turn away
from this responsibility, but I cannot
escape it. This is why reason arises

Nothing else in our lives so disrupts
our consciousness as an encounter
with another person, who, simply by
being there, calls to us and asks us
to account for ourselves.

See also: Edmund Husserl 22425  Roland Barthes 29091
Hlne Cixous 322  Julia Kristeva 323



Luce Irigaray 320



274

IN ORDER TO SEE THE
WORLD, WE MUST BREAK
WITH OUR FAMILIAR
ACCEPTANCE OF IT
MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY (19081961)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Phenomenology
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
claims that philosophy begins
with a sense of wonder.
1641 Ren Descartes
Meditations on First Philosophy
establishes a form of mind
body dualism that MerleauPonty will reject.

T

he idea that philosophy
begins with our ability to
wonder at the world goes
back as far as ancient Greece.
Usually we take our everyday lives
for granted, but Aristotle claimed
that if we want to understand the
world more deeply, we have to put
aside our familiar acceptance of
things. And nowhere, perhaps, is
this harder to do than in the realm

Our experience is
lled with puzzles and
contradictions.

Early 1900s Edmund Husserl
founds phenomenology as a
philosophical school.
1927 Martin Heidegger writes
Being and Time, a major
inuence on Merleau-Ponty.
AFTER
1979 Hubert Dreyfus draws
on the works of Heidegger,
Wittgenstein, and MerleauPonty to explore philosophical
problems raised by articial
intelligence and robotics.

of our experience. After all, what
could be more reliable than the
facts of direct perception?
French philosopher MerleauPonty was interested in looking
more closely at our experience of
the world, and in questioning our
everyday assumptions. This puts
him in the tradition known as
phenomenology, an approach to
philosophy pioneered by Edmund

Our everyday assumptions
prevent us from seeing these
puzzles and contradictions.

We must...

...put our everyday
assumptions to one side.

...relearn to look at
our experience.

In order to see the world,
we must break with our
familiar acceptance of it.

THE MODERN WORLD 275
See also: Aristotle 5663  Edmund Husserl 22425  Ludwig Wittgenstein
24651  Martin Heidegger 25255  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

Cognitive science

Man is in the world and
only in the world
does he know himself.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty

Husserl at the beginning of the
20th century. Husserl wanted to
explore rst-person experience in
a systematic way, while putting all
assumptions about it to one side.

The body-subject
Merleau-Ponty takes up Husserls
approach, but with one important
difference. He is concerned that
Husserl ignores what is most
important about our experience
the fact that it consists not just
of mental experience, but also of
bodily experience. In his most
important book, The Phenomenology
of Perception, Merleau-Ponty
explores this idea and comes to
the conclusion that the mind and
body are not separate entities
a thought that contradicts a long
philosophical tradition championed
by Descartes. For Merleau-Ponty,
we have to see that thought and
perception are embodied, and
that the world, consciousness, and
the body are all part of a single
system. And his alternative to the
disembodied mind proposed by
Descartes is what he calls the bodysubject. In other words, MerleauPonty rejects the dualists view that
the world is made of two separate
entities, called mind and matter.

Because he was interested in seeing
the world anew, Merleau-Ponty took
an interest in cases of abnormal
experience. For example, he believed
that the phantom limb phenomenon
(in which an amuptee feels his
missing limb) shows that the body
cannot simply be a machine. If it
were, the body would no longer
acknowledge the missing partbut
it still exists for the subject because
the limb has always been bound
up with the subjects will. In other
words, the body is never just a
bodyit is always a lived body.
Merleau-Pontys focus on the role
of the body in experience, and his
insights into the nature of the mind
as fundamentally embodied, have
led to a revival of interest in his work
among cognitive scientists. Many
recent developments in cognitive
science seem to bear out his idea
that, once we break with our familiar
acceptance of the world, experience
is very strange indeed. 

Maurice MerleauPonty
Maurice Merleau-Ponty was
born in Rochefort-sur-Mer,
France, in 1908. He attended
the cole Normale Suprieure
along with Jean-Paul Sartre
and Simone de Beauvoir, and
graduated in philosophy in
1930. He worked as a teacher
at various schools, until joining
the infantry during World
War II. His major work, The
Phenomenology of Perception,
was published in 1945, after
which he taught philosophy
at the University of Lyon.
Merleau-Pontys interests
extended beyond philosophy
to include subjects such as
education and child psychology.
He was also a regular
contributor to the journal Les
Temps modernes. In 1952,
Merleau-Ponty became the
youngest-ever Chair of
Philosophy at the College de
France, and remained in the
post until his death in 1961,
at the age of only 53.
Key works

MRI scans of the brain provide
doctors with life-saving information.
However, in Merleau-Pontys view, no
amount of physical information can give
us a complete account of experience.

1942 The Structure of
Behaviour
1945 The Phenomenology
of Perception
1964 The Visible and the
Invisible

276

MAN IS DEFINED AS
A HUMAN BEING AND
WOMAN
AS
A
FEMALE
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR (19081986)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Feminism
BEFORE
c.350 BCE Aristotle says, The
female is a female by virtue of
a certain lack of qualities.
1792 Mary Wollstonecraft
publishes A Vindication of the
Rights of Woman, illustrating
the equality of the sexes.
1920s Martin Heidegger sets
out a philosophy of existence,
preguring existentialism.

F

rench philosopher Simone
de Beauvoir writes in her
book The Second Sex that
throughout history, the standard
measure of what we take to be
humanboth in philosophy and
in society at largehas been a
peculiarly male view. Some
philosophers, such as Aristotle,
have been explicit in equating full
humanity with maleness. Others
have not said as much, but have
nevertheless taken maleness as the
standard against which humanity

is to be judged. It is for this reason
that de Beauvoir says that the Self
(or I) of philosophical knowledge
is by default male, and his binary
pairthe femaleis therefore
something else, which she calls
the Other. The Self is active and
knowing, whereas the Other is all
that the Self rejects: passivity,
voicelessness, and powerlessness.
De Beauvoir is also concerned
with the way that women are
judged to be equal only insofar as
they are like men. Even those who

Most of those who have
written about human
nature have been men.

1940s Jean-Paul Sartre says
existence precedes essence.
AFTER
1970s Luce Irigaray explores
the philosophical implications
of sexual difference.
From 1980 Julia Kristeva
breaks down the notions
of male and female as
characterized by de Beauvoir.

Men have taken maleness
as the standard against
which they judge
human nature.

Men have dened
women by how they
differ from this standard.

Man is dened as
a human being and
woman as a female.

THE MODERN WORLD 277
See also: Hypatia of Alexandria 331  Mary Wollstonecraft 175  Jean-Paul Sartre
26871  Luce Irigaray 320  Hlne Cixous 322  Martha Nussbaum 339

Representation of the
world is the work of men;
they describe it from
their own point of view.
Simone de Beauvoir

have written on behalf of the
equality of women, she says, have
done so by arguing that equality
means that women can be and do
the same as men. She claims that
this idea is mistaken, because it
ignores the fact that women and
men are different. De Beauvoirs
philosophical background was in
phenomenology, the study of how
things appear to our experience.
This view maintains that each of us
constructs the world from within the
frame of our own consciousness; we
constitute things and meanings
from the stream of our experiences.
Consequently de Beauvoir maintains
that the relationship that we have to
our own bodies, to others, and to the
world, as well as to philosophy itself,
is strongly inuenced by whether
we are male or female.

construct. Since any construct is
open to change and interpretion, this
means that there are many ways of
being a woman; there is room for
existential choice. In the introduction
to The Second Sex de Beauvoir
notes societys awareness of this
uidity: We are exhorted to be
women, remain women, become
women. It would appear, then, that
every female human being is not
necessarily a woman. She later
states the position explicitly: One
is not born but becomes a woman.
De Beauvoir says that women
must free themselves both from the
idea that they must be like men, and
from the passivity that society has
induced in them. Living a truly
authentic existence carries more
risk than accepting a role handed
down by society, but it is the only
path to equality and freedom. 

Existential feminism
Simone De Beauvoir was also an
existentialist, believing that we are
born without purpose and must
carve out an authentic existence for
ourselves, choosing what to become.
In applying this idea to the notion
of woman, she asks us to separate
the biological entity (the bodily
form which females are born into)
from femininity, which is a social

Simone de Beauvoir
The existentialist philosopher
Simone de Beauvoir was born
in Paris in 1908. She studied
philosophy at the Sorbonne
University, and it was here
that she met Jean-Paul Sartre,
with whom she began a
lifelong relationship. Both a
philosopher and an awardwinning novelist, she often
explored philosophical themes
within ctional works such as
She Came to Stay and The
Mandarins. Her most famous
work, The Second Sex, brought
an existentialist approach to
feminist ideas. Despite initially
being vilied by the political
right and left, and being placed
on the Vaticans Index of
Forbidden Books, it became
one of the most important
feminist works of the 20th
century. De Beauvoir was a
prolic writer, producing
travel books, memoirs, a
four-volume autobiography,
and political essays over the
course of her life. She died at
the age of 78, and was buried
in Montparnasse cemetery.
Key works

The many myths of woman as mother,
wife, virgin, symbol of nature, and so on
trap women, claimed de Beauvoir, into
impossible ideals, while denying their
individual selves and situations.

1944 Pyrrhus and Cineas
1947 The Ethics of Ambiguity
1949 The Second Sex
1954 The Mandarins

278

LANGUAGE IS
A SOCIAL ART

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE (19082000)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of language

because we become used
to the ways in which they
are used by others

Words are
meaningful to us

APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
c.400 BCE Platos Cratylus
investigates the relationship
between words and things.
19th century Sren
Kierkegaard stresses the
importance of the study of
language for philosophy.
1950s Ludwig Wittgenstein
writes that there is no such
thing as a private language.
AFTER
1980s Richard Rorty suggests
that knowledge is more like
conversation than the
representation of reality.
1990s In Consciousness
Explained, Quines former
student Daniel Dennett says
that both meaning and inner
experience can only be
understood as social acts.

not because there is
a link between words
and actual things.

The way that language
is used socially
makes it meaningful.

Language is
a social art.

S

ome philosophers assert
that language is about the
relationship between words
and things. Quine, however,
disagrees. Language is not about
the relationship between objects
and verbal signiers, but about
knowing what to say and when to
say it. It is, he says in his 1968 essay
Ontological Relativity, a social art.
Quine suggests the following
thought experiment. Imagine that
we come across some people
perhaps natives of another country
who speak a language we do not
share. We are sitting with a group

of these people when a rabbit
appears, and one of the natives
says gavagai. We wonder if there
can be a connection between the
eventthe appearance of the
rabbitand the fact that the native
says gavagai. As time goes on,
we note that every time a rabbit
appears, somebody says gavagai,
so we conclude that gavagai can
be reliably translated as rabbit.
But, Quine insists, we are wrong.
Gavagai could mean all manner
of things. It could mean oh, look,
dinner! for example, or it could
mean behold, a uffy creature!

THE MODERN WORLD 279
See also: Plato 5055  Sren Kierkegaard 19495
Roland Barthes 29091  Daniel Dennett 339

If we wanted to determine the
meaning of gavagai, we could try
another method. We could point to
other uffy creatures (or other things
on the dinner menu) and see if our
utterance of gavagai met with
assent or dissent. But even if we
were to reach a position where, in
each and every occasion on which
gavagai was uttered, we ourselves
would utter the word rabbit, we
still could not be sure that this was
an appropriate translation. Gavagai
could mean set of rabbit parts or
wood-living rabbit or rabbit or
hare; it might even refer to a short
prayer that must be uttered
whenever a rabbit is seen.



Ferdinand de Saussure 223

No word has a xed meaning,
according to Quine. When the
word rabbit is spoken, it may
mean any one of a number
of things, depending on the
context in which it is said.

Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651





Pet
Dinner

Pest

Animal
spirit

Unsettled language
In attempting to establish the
precise meaning of this mysterious
gavagai, therefore, we might think
that the solution would be to learn
the language of our informants
thoroughly, so that we could be
absolutely sure of the contexts in
which the word was spoken. But
this would only result in multiplying
the problem, because we could not

Willard Van
Orman Quine

be sure that the other words we
found ourselves using to explain
the meaning of gavagai were
themselves accurate translations.
Quine refers to this problem as
the indeterminacy of translation,
and it has unsettling implications.
It suggests that ultimately words
do not have meanings. The sense

of somebody uttering gavagai
(or, for that matter, rabbit), and
of this utterance being meaningful
comes not from some mysterious
link between words and things,
but from the patterns of our
behavior, and the fact that we
have learned to participate in
language as a social art. 

Born in 1908 in Ohio, USA, Quine
studied at Harvard with Alfred
North Whitehead, a philosopher
of logic and mathematics. While
there he also met Bertrand
Russell, who was to become a
profound inuence on his thought.
After completing his PhD in 1932,
Quine traveled throughout Europe,
meeting many of its most eminent
philosophers, including several of
the Vienna Circle.
Returning to teach at Harvard,
Quines philosophical career was
briey interrupted during World
War II when he spent four years
decrypting messages for the US

Navy intelligence. A great
traveler, he was said to be
prouder of the fact that he had
visited 118 countries than of his
many awards and fellowships.
Quine became professor of
philosophy at Harvard in 1956,
and taught there until his death
in 2000, aged 92.
Key works
1952 Methods of Logic
1953 From a Logical Point
of View
1960 Word and Object
1990 The Pursuit of Truth

280

THE FUNDAMENTAL
SENSE OF FREEDOM
IS FREEDOM
FROM
CHAINS
ISAIAH BERLIN (19091997)
IN CONTEXT

Freedom is both
positive and negative.

BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
1651 In his
the book
Leviathan,
Leviathan,
Thomas Hobbes considers
the relationship between
freedom and state power.
1844 Sren Kierkegaard
argues that our freedom to
make moral decisions is a
chief cause of unhappiness.

Positive: we are free to
control our own destiny and
choose our own goals.

Negative: we are free from
external obstacles and
domination, or chains.

But our individual goals
sometimes conict or lead
to the domination of others.

When our own positive
freedom leads to a decrease
in others negative freedom,
it becomes oppression.

1859 In his book On Liberty,
John Stuart Mill distinguishes
between freedom from coercion
and freedom to act.
1941 Psychoanalyst
Psychoanalyst Erich
Erich
Fromm explores
explores positive
positiveand
and
negative liberty
liberty in
in his
hisbook
book
The Fear of Freedom.
Freedom.
AFTER
Present day The development
of new surveillance technology
raises fresh questions about
the nature of freedom.

The fundamental sense
of freedom is freedom
from chains.

W

hat does it mean to be
free? This is the question
explored by the British
philosopher Isaiah Berlin in his
famous essay Two Concepts of
Liberty, written in 1958. Here he
makes a distinction between what
he calls positive and negative

freedom. Although he is not the rst
to draw this distinction, he does so
with great originality, and uses it to
expose apparent inconsistencies in
our everyday notion of freedom.
For Berlin, negative freedom
is what he calls our fundamental
sense of freedom. This kind of

THE MODERN WORLD 281
See also: Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459  John Stuart Mill 19093 
Sren Kierkegaard 19495  Karl Marx 196203  Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

For Berlin, the problem is that these
two forms of freedom are often in
conict. Think, for example, of
the freedom that comes from the
discipline of learning how to play
the tuba. As a beginner, I can
do little more than struggle with
my own inability to playbut
eventually I can play with a kind
of liberated gusto. Or think of the
fact that people frequently exercise
their positive freedom by voting
for a particular government,
knowing that their negative
freedom will be restricted when
that government comes to power.

The goals of life

Soviet propaganda often depicted
workers liberated from capitalism.
From a capitalist view, however, such
images showed a triumph of negative
freedom over positive freedom.

freedom is freedom from external
obstacles: I am free because I am
not chained to a rock, because I am
not in prison, and so on. This is
freedom from something else. But
Berlin points out that when we
talk about freedom, we usually
mean something more subtle than
this. Freedom is also a matter of
self-determination, of being a
person with hopes, and intentions,
and purposes that are ones own.
This positive freedom is about
being in control of ones own
destiny. After all, I am not free just
because all the doors of my house
are unlocked. And this positive
freedom is not exclusively personal,
because self-determination can
also be desired at the level of the
group or of the state.

Berlin points to another problem.
Who is to say what a suitable goal
of positive freedom should be?
Authoritarian or totalitarian
regimes often have an inexible
view of the purpose of human life,
and so restrict negative freedoms
to maximize their idea of human
happiness. Indeed, political
oppression frequently arises from an
abstract idea of what the good life
is, followed by state intervention
to make that idea a reality.
Berlins response to this is
twofold. First, it is important to
recognize that the various freedoms
we may desire will always be in
conict, for there is no such thing
as the goal of lifeonly the goals
of particular individuals. This
fact, he claims, is obscured by
philosophers who look for a universal
basis for morality, but confuse right
action with the purpose of life
itself. Second, we need to keep
alive the fundamental sense of
freedom as an absence of bullying
and domination, so that we do not
nd our ideals turning into chains
for ourselves and for others. 

Isaiah Berlin
Isaiah Berlin was born in Riga,
Latvia, in 1909. He spent the
rst part of his life in Russia,
rstly under the Russian
empire, and then under the
rule of the new Communist
state. Due to rising antiSemitism, however, and
problems with the Soviet
rgime, his family emigrated
to Britain in 1921. Berlin was
an outstanding student at
Oxford University, where he
remained as a lecturer. He
was a philosopher with broad
interests, ranging from art and
literature to politics. His essay
Two Concepts of Liberty was
delivered in 1958 at Oxford
University, and it is often
considered one of the classics
of 20th-century political
theory. He is celebrated for
being one of the foremost
scholars of liberalism.
Key works
1953 The Hedgehog and the
Fox: An Essay on Tolstoys
View of History
1958 Two Concepts of Liberty
1990 The Crooked Timber of
Humanity: Chapters in the
History of Ideas
2000 The Power of Ideas
2006 Political Ideas in the
Romantic Age

282

THINK LIKE
A MOUNTAIN

ARNE NAESS (19122009)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Environmental philosophy
BEFORE
C.1660 Benedictus Spinoza
develops his philosophy of
nature as an extension of God.
1949 Aldo Leopolds The Sand
County Almanac is published.
1960 British scientist James
Lovelock rst proposes his
Gaia hypothesis, exploring
the natural world as a single,
self-regulating system.
1962 American biologist
Rachel Carson publishes
Silent Spring, which becomes
an important inuence on
Naesss thinking.
AFTER
1984 Zen master and teacher
Robert Aitken Roshi combines
deep ecology with the ideas
of the Japanese Buddhist
philosopher Dogen.

T

he injunction to think like
a mountain has become
closely associated with the
concept of deep ecologya term
coined in 1973 by the Norwegian
philosopher and environmental
campaigner, Arne Naess. He uses
the term to stress his belief that we
must rst recognize we are part of
nature, and not separate from it, if
we are to avoid environmental
catastrophe. But the notion of
thinking like a mountain goes back
to 1949, when it was expressed by
American ecologist Aldo Leopold
in The Sand County Almanac.

Working as a forester in New
Mexico in the early part of the
20th century, Leopold shot a female
wolf on the mountainside. We
reached the old wolf in time to
watch a erce green re dying in
her eyes," he wrote. I realized then,
and have known ever since, that
there was something new to me in
those eyessomething known only
to her and to the mountain. It was
from this experience that Leopold
came to the idea that we should
think like a mountain, recognizing
not just our needs or those of our
fellow humans, but those of the

Thinking like
a mountain is

realizing that we are part
of the biosphere.

realizing our responsibilities
to all other living things.

We must think about the
long-term interests of the
environment as a whole.

THE MODERN WORLD 283
See also: Laozi 2425



Benedictus Spinoza 12629

The thinking for
the future has to be
loyal to nature.
Arne Naess

entire natural world. He implies
that often we miss the broader
implications of our actions, only
considering the immediate benets
to ourselves. To think like a
mountain means identifying with
the wider environment and being
aware of its role in our lives.

Harmonizing with nature
Naess takes up Leopold's idea by
proposing his deep ecology. He
states that we only protect our
environment by undergoing the
kind of transformation of which
Leopold writes. Naess urges us to

Arne Naess



Friedrich Schelling 335

move toward seeing ourselves as
part of the whole biosphere. Instead
of viewing the world with a kind of
detachment, we must nd our place
in nature, by acknowledging the
intrinsic value of all elements of the
world we inhabit.
Naess introduces the ecological
self, a sense of self that is rooted in
an awareness of our relationship to
a larger community of all living
beings." He claims that broadening
our identication with the world to
include wolves, frogs, spiders, and
perhaps even mountains, leads to a
more joyful and meaningful life.
Naesss "deep ecology" has had
a powerful effect on environmental
philosophy and on the development
of environmental activism. For
those of us who live in cities, it may
seem hard or even impossible to
connect with an "ecological self."
Nevertheless, it may be possible.
As the Zen master Robert Aitken
Roshi wrote in 1984, When one
thinks like a mountain, one thinks
also like the black bear, so that
honey dribbles down your fur as
you catch the bus to work. 
Widely acknowledged as the
leading Norwegian philosopher
of the 20th century, Arne Naess
became the youngest-ever full
professor at the University of Oslo
at the age of 27. He was also a
noted mountaineer and led a
successful expedition to the
summit of Tirich Mir in northern
Pakistan in 1950.
It was only after Naess retired
from his teaching post in 1970
that he actively developed his
thinking about the natural world
and became involved in direct
action on environmental issues. In
1970, he chained himself to the

The natural world, for Naess, is not
something that we should strive to
control and manipulate for our own gain.
Living well involves living as an equal
with all the elements of our environment.

rocks by the Mardalsfossen
Waterfall in Norway to protest
against the building of a nearby
dam. Elected as chairperson of
Greenpeace Norway in 1988, he
was knighted in 2005.
Key works
1968 Scepticism
1974 Ecology, Society
and Lifestyle
1988 Thinking Like a Mountain
(with John Seed, Pat Fleming
and Joanna Macy)
2002 Lifes Philosophy: Reason
and Feeling in a Deeper World

284

LIFE WILL BE LIVED
ALL THE BETTER IF
IT
HAS
NO
MEANING
ALBERT CAMUS (19131960)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology

Because we have
consciousness, we feel that
life is meaningful.

But we know that
the universe as a whole
has no meaning.

To live well, we need to
overcome this contradiction.

Our lives are
a contradiction.

APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
1849 Sren Kierkegaard
explores the idea of the absurd
in his book, Fear and Trembling.
1864 Russian writer Fyodor
Dostoyevsky publishes Notes
from the Underground, which
has existentialist themes.
1901 Friedrich Nietzsche
writes in Will to Power that
our existence (action,
suffering, willing, feeling)
has no meaning.
1927 Martin Heideggers
Being and Time lays the
ground for the development
of existential philosophy.
AFTER
1971 Philosopher Thomas
Nagel argues that absurdity
arises out of a contradiction
within us.

We can do this by fully
embracing the
meaninglessness
of existence.

S

ome people believe that
philosophys task is to
search for the meaning of
life. But the French philosopher and
novelist Albert Camus thought that
philosophy should recognize instead
that life is inherently meaningless.
While at rst this seems a depressing
view, Camus believes that only by
embracing this idea are we capable
of living as fully as possible.

Life will be lived
all the better if it
has no meaning.

Camus idea appears in his essay
The Myth of Sisyphus. Sisyphus
was a Greek king who fell out of
favor with the gods, and so was
sentenced to a terrible fate in the
Underworld. His task was to roll
an enormous rock to the top of a
hill, only to watch it roll back to
the bottom. Sisyphus then had to
trudge down the hill to begin the
task again, repeating this for all

THE MODERN WORLD 285
See also: Sren Kierkegaard 19495



Friedrich Nietzsche 21421



Martin Heidegger 25255

Camus recognizes that much of what
we do certainly seems meaningful,
but what he is suggesting is quite
subtle. On the one hand, we are
conscious beings who cannot
help living our lives as if they are
meaningful. On the other hand,
these meanings do not reside out
there in the universe; they reside
only in our minds. The universe as
a whole has no meaning and no
purpose; it just is. But because,
unlike other living things, we have
consciousness, we are the kinds of
beings who nd meaning and
purpose everywhere.
Sisyphus was condemned eternally
to push a rock up a hill, but Camus
thought he might nd freedom even
in this grim situation if he accepted
the meaninglessness of his eternal task.

eternity. Camus was fascinated by
this myth, because it seemed to
him to encapsulate something of the
meaninglessness and absurdity of
our lives. He sees life as an endless
struggle to perform tasks that are
essentially meaningless.

Albert Camus

Recognizing the absurd
The absurd, for Camus, is the feeling
that we have when we recognize
that the meanings we give to life
do not exist beyond our own
consciousness. It is the result of
a contradiction between our own
sense of lifes meaning, and our
knowledge that nevertheless the
universe as a whole is meaningless.
Camus explores what it might
mean to live in the light of this
contradiction. He claims that it is
Camus was born in Algeria in
1913. His father was killed a year
later in World War I, and Camus
was brought up by his mother in
extreme poverty. He studied
philosophy at the University of
Algiers, where he suffered the
rst attack of the tuberculosis
which was to recur throughout his
life. At the age of 25 he went to
live in France, where he became
involved in politics. He joined the
French Communist Party in 1935
but was expelled in 1937. During
World War II he worked for the
French Resistance, editing an
underground newspaper and



Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

The struggle towards
the heights is enough
to ll a mans heart.
Albert Camus

only once we can accept the fact
that life is meaningless and absurd
that we are in a position to live fully.
In embracing the absurd, our lives
become a constant revolt against the
meaninglessness of the universe,
and we can live freely.
This idea was further developed
by the philosopher Thomas Nagel,
who said that the absurdity of life
lies in the nature of consciousness,
because however seriously we take
life, we always know that there is
some perspective from which this
seriousness can be questioned. 
writing many of his best-known
novels, including The Stranger.
He wrote many plays, novels,
and essays, and was awarded
the Nobel Prize for Literature in
1957. Camus died in a car crash
aged 46, having discarded
a train ticket to accept a lift
back to Paris with a friend.
Key works
1942 The Myth of Sisyphus
1942 The Stranger
1947 The Plague
1951 The Rebel
1956 The Fall

CONTEM
PHILOSO
1950PRESENT

PORARY
PHY

288 INTRODUCTION

Frantz Fanon
publishes Black
Skin, White Masks.

The Vietnam War begins.
The USSR and China
support communist North
Vietnam, while the US
supports South Vietnam.

Thomas Kuhn
publishes The
Structure of Scientic
Revolutions.

Chinas Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution
purges China of everything
Western, capitalist,
traditionalist, or religious.

1952

1955

1962

1966

T

1953

1961

1964

1967

Simone de Beauvoir
publishes her
groundbreaking
feminist work,
The Second Sex.

The Berlin Wall is
constructed, dividing
East and West Germany
until its fall in 1989.

The Civil Rights Act
1964 becomes law in
the US, prohibiting
discrimination by race.

Jacques Derrida,
the founder of
deconstruction,
publishes Writing
and Difference.

he closing decades of the
20th century were notable
for accelerating advances
in technology and the subsequent
improvement in communications
of all kinds. The increasing power
of the mass media, especially
television, since the end of World
War II had fuelled a rise in popular
culture with its associated
antiestablishment ideals, and this
in turn was prompting political and
social change. From the 1960s
onward, the old order was being
questioned in Europe and the US,
and dissent gathered momentum
in Eastern Europe.
By the 1980s, relations between
the East and West were thawing,
and the Cold War was coming to a
close; the fall of the Berlin Wall in
1989 offered hope for the new
decade. But the 1990s was a period

of ethnic and religious unrest,
culminating in the US declaring
a War on Terror at the start of the
new millennium.

Elitist philosophies
Culture in the West went through
similarly signicant changes. The
gap between popular and high
culture widened after the 1960s, as
the intellectual avant-garde often
decided to disregard public taste.
Philosophy followed a similarly
elitist path, particularly after the
death of Jean-Paul Sartre, whose
Marxist existentialismbeloved of
1960s intellectualsnow had less
of an audience.
Continental philosophy was
dominated in the 1970s and 80s
by structuralism, a movement
that grew from literature-based
French philosophy. Central to

this movement was the notion
of deconstructing texts and
revealing them to be inherently
unstable, with many contradictory
meanings. The theorys principal
proponentsFrench theorists Louis
Althusser, Jacques Derrida, and
Michel Foucaultlinked their
textual analyses with left-wing
politics, while the analyst Jacques
Lacan gave structuralism a
psychoanalytic perspective. Their
ideas were soon taken up by a
generation of writers and artists
working under the banner of
postmodernism, which rejected
all possibility of a single, objective
truth, viewpoint, or narrative.
Structuralisms contribution to
philosophy was not enthusiastically
received by philosophers in the
English-speaking world, who
viewed the work at best with

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 289

Apollo 11 becomes
the rst successful
manned mission
to the moon.

Jean-Franois Lyotard
publishes The Postmodern
Condition: A Report
on Knowledge.

The World Wide Web
opens up to home and
personal use.

Al-Qaeda terrorist
attacks on New York
and Washington,
D.C., US, lead to the
War on Terror.

1969

1979

1992

2001

1971

1989

1994

2009

The non-government
environment agency
Greenpeace is formed
in Canada, evolving
from peace movements
and antinuclear groups.

Many European states
overthrow their communist
regimes, including Poland,
Hungary, East Germany,
Bulgaria, Romania,
and Czechoslovakia.

Henry David
Oruka publishes
Sage Philosophy.

Barack Obama
becomes the rst
African-American
president of the
United States.

suspicion, and largely with derision.
Within a philosophical tradition of
linguistic analysis, continental
structuralism seemed ultimately
simplisticalthough it was often
written in impenetrable prose that
belied its literary roots.
The squabbles of philosophers
did not inspire the popular culture
of the time. This may have been
because postmodernism was largely
incomprehensible to the general
public. Their most common
experience of it was postmodern art,
which was highly conceptual and
accompanied by knowing references
by an intellectual elite. It seemed to
deliberately exclude any possibility
of mass appreciation, and became
seen as an abstract philosophy only
enjoyed by professional academics
and artists, and out of touch with
the world most people lived in. The

public, as well as businesses and
governments, wanted more downto-earth guidance from philosophy.

A more practical approach
Though postmodern philosophy
may not have found favor with the
majority of the general public, some
philosophers of the period chose to
focus on more pressing social,
political, and ethical questions
that had more relevance to peoples
everyday lives. Thinkers in
postcolonial Africa such as Frantz
Fanon began to examine race,
identity, and the problems that
were inherent in any struggle for
liberation. Later thinkers, such as
Henry David Oruka, would begin
to amass a new history of African
philosophy, questioning the rules
governing philosophy itself, and
what it should include.

Continuing in the tradition of
Simone de Beauvoirs existential
feminist philosophy, French
philosophers such as Hlne
Cixous and Luce Irigaray added
a postmodern perspective to
feminism, but other thinkers on
both sides of the Atlantic left
postmodernism completely to
one side. Some, such as American
philosopher John Rawls and
Germanys Jrgen Habermas,
returned to examining important
everyday concepts in depth, such
as justice and communication.
The more practical approach to
philosophy in the 21st century has
led to a renewed public interest in
the subject. There is no way of
predicting what direction it will
take, but philosophy is certain to
continue to provide the world with
thought-provoking ideas. 

290

LANGUAGE
IS A SKIN

ROLAND BARTHES (19151980)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of language

The lovers language
trembles with desire.

All philosophy about love
is addressed toward a
particular object of desire.

APPROACH
Semiotics
BEFORE
380 BCE Platos Symposium
is the rst sustained
philosophical discussion
of love in the West.
4th century CE St Augustine
of Hippo writes extensively on
the nature of love.
1916 Ferdinand de Saussures
Course in General Linguistics
establishes modern semiotics
and the study of language as
a series of signs.
1966 French psychoanalyst
Jacques Lacan looks at
the relationship between
Alcibiades, Socrates, and
Agathon in his crits.
AFTER
1990s Julia Kristeva explores
the relationship between love,
semiotics, and psychoanalysis.

When I write or speak
about love, my language
rubs against the secret
object of my desire.

Language affects the other
like skin-on-skin contact.

T

he strangest, but most
popular, book written by
philosopher and literary
critic Roland Barthes is A Lovers
Discourse. As the French title,
Fragments dun discours amoureux,
suggests, this is a book told in
fragments and snapshots, somewhat
like the essay One-Way Street by
the German philosopher Walter
Benjamin. A Lovers Discourse is
not so much a book of philosophy
as it is a love story; but it is a love
story without any real story. There

Language
is a skin.

are no characters, and there
is nothing in the way of a plot.
There are only the reections
of a lover in what Barthes calls
extreme solitude.
At the very beginning of the
book, Barthes makes clear that a
plot is not possible, because the
solitary thoughts of a lover come in
outbursts that are often contradictory
and lack any clear order. As a lover,
Barthes suggests, I might even nd
myself plotting against myself. The
lover is somebody who might be

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 291
See also: Plato 5055  St Augustine of Hippo 7273
Jacques Derrida 30813  Julia Kristeva 323

Every lover
is mad.
Roland Barthes

affectionately described as having
lost the plot. So instead of using
a plot, or narrative, Barthes arranges
his book like an extraordinary
encyclopaedia of contradictory and
disordered outbursts, any of which
might serve as the point the reader
might suddenly exclaim, Thats so
true! I recognize that scene...

The language of love
It is in this context that Barthes
suggests language is a skin.
Language, at least the language
of the lover, is not something that

Roland Barthes



Ferdinand de Saussure 223



Walter Benjamin 258



simply talks about the world in a
neutral fashion, but it is something
that, as Barthes says, trembles
with desire. Barthes writes of how
I rub my language against the
other. It is as if I had words instead
of ngers, or ngers at the tip of my
words. Even if I write cool, detached
philosophy about love, Barthes
claims, there is buried in my
philosophical coolness a secret
address to a particular person, an
object of my desire, even if this
somebody is a phantom or a
creature still to come.
Barthes gives an example of this
secret address (although not, it
should be said, in the context of a
particularly detached philosophical
discussion) from Platos dialogue,
The Symposium. This is an account
of a discussion on the subject of
love that takes place in the house
of the poet Agathon. A statesman
called Alcibiades turns up to the
discussion both late and drunk, and
sits down on a couch with Agathon
and the philosopher Socrates. The
drunken speech he gives is full
of praise for Socrates, but it is

Agathon that Alcibiades desires; it
is against Agathon, so to speak, that
Alcibiades language is rubbing.
But what of the language that
we use when talking of other
things? Is only the lovers language
a skin that trembles with hidden
desire, or is this also true of other
types of language? Barthes does
not tell us, leaving us to consider
the idea for ourselves. 

Barthes was born in Cherbourg,
France, in 1915. He attended the
University of Sorbonne in Paris
from 1935, graduating in 1939,
but by this time he had already
contracted the tuberculosis that
would afict him for the
remainder of his life. His illness
made it difcult to acquire
teaching qualications, but it
exempted him from military
service during World War II. After
the war, having nally qualied
as a teacher, he taught in France,
Romania, and Egypt. He returned
to live in France full time in 1952,
and there started to write the

pieces that were collected
together and published under
the title Mythologies in 1957.
Barthes reputation grew
steadily through the 1960s, in
France and internationally, and
he taught both at home and
abroad. He died at the age of 64,
when he was run over by
a laundry van after lunching
with President Mitterrand.

The lovers language is like a skin,
says Barthes, which inhabits the lover.
Its words are able to move the
belovedand only the belovedin
an almost physical or tactile way.

Key works
1957 Mythologies
1973 The Pleasure of the Text
1977 A Lovers Discourse

292

HOW WOULD WE
MANAGE WITHOUT
AMARYCULTURE?
MIDGLEY (1919)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
denes human beings as
political animals, suggesting
that not only are we natural
beings, but that the creation of
culture is a part of our nature.
1st century BCE Roman poet
Titus Lucretius Carus writes
On the Nature of the Universe,
exploring the natural roots of
human culture.
1859 Naturalist Charles
Darwin publishes On the
Origin of Species, arguing that
all life has evolved through a
process of natural selection.
AFTER
1980s onward Richard
Dawkins and Mary Midgley
debate the implications of
Darwinism for our view of
human nature.

I

n her book Beast and Man,
published in 1978, the British
philosopher Mary Midgley
assesses the impact the natural
sciences have on our understanding
of human nature. It is often claimed
that the ndings of the sciences,
particularly those of palaeontology
and evolutionary biology, undermine
our views of what it is to be human.
Midgley wants to address these
fears, and she does so by stressing
both the things that set us apart

We mistakenly cut
ourselves off from other
animals, trying not
to believe we have
an animal nature.
Mary Midgley

See also: Plato 5055



Aristotle 5663

from other animals and the things
that we share with the rest of
the animal kingdom.
One of the questions that she
tackles is that of the relationship
between nature and culture in
human life. Her concern is to
address the fact that many people
see nature and culture as somehow
opposed, as if culture is something
non-natural that is added onto
our animal natures.
Midgley disagrees with the
idea that culture is something of
a wholly different order to nature.
Instead, she wants to argue that
culture is a natural phenomenon.
In other words, we have evolved to
be the kinds of creatures who have
cultures. It could be said that we
spin culture as naturally as spiders
spin webs. If this is so, then we
can no more do without culture
than a spider can do without its
web: our need for culture is both
innate and natural. In this way,
Midgley hopes both to account
for human uniqueness, and also
to put us in the larger context of
our evolutionary past. 


Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 293

NORMAL SCIENCE
DOES NOT AIM AT
NOVELTIES OF FACT
OR
THEORY
THOMAS KUHN (19221996)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
History of science
BEFORE
1543 Nicolaus Copernicus
publishes On the Revolutions
of the Heavenly Spheres,
leading to a paradigm shift in
our view of the solar system.
1934 In The Logic of Scientic
Discovery, Karl Popper denes
falsiability as a criterion
for science.
AFTER
1975 Paul Feyerabend writes
Against Method, advocating
epistemological anarchism.
1976 In Proofs and Refutations,
Imre Lakatos brings together
Karl Poppers falsicationism
and the work of Kuhn.
Today Rival interpretations
of quantum phenomena yield
rival paradigms of the
subatomic world.

A

merican physicist and
historian of science
Thomas Kuhn is best
known for his book The Structure
of Scientic Revolutions, published
in 1962. The book is both an
exploration of turning points in
the history of science and an
attempt to set out a theory of how
revolutions in science take place.

Paradigm shifts
Science, in Kuhns view, alternates
between periods of normal science
and periods of crisis. Normal
science is the routine process by
which scientists working within
a theoretical frameworkor
paradigmaccumulate results
that do not call the theoretical
underpinnings of their framework
into question. Sometimes, of
course, anomalous, or unfamiliar,
results are encountered, but these
are usually considered to be errors
on the part of the scientists
concernedproof, according to
Kuhn, that normal science does
not aim at novelties. Over time,
however, anomalous results can

accumulate until a crisis point is
reached. Following the crisis, if a
new theory has been formulated,
there is a shift in the paradigm,
and the new theoretical framework
replaces the old. Eventually this
framework is taken for granted,
and normal science resumesuntil
further anomalies arise. An example
of such a shift was the shattering
of the classical view of space and
time following the conrmation of
Einsteins theories of relativity. 

Nicolaus Copernicuss claim that
Earth orbits the Sun was a revolution
in scientic thinking. It led to scientists
abandoning the belief that our planet
is at the center of the universe.

See also: Francis Bacon 11011  Rudolf Carnap 257
Paul Feyerabend 297  Richard Rorty 31419



Karl Popper 26265



294

THE PRINCIPLES OF
JUSTICE ARE CHOSEN
BEHIND A VEIL
OF
IGNORANCE
JOHN RAWLS (19212002)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Social contract theory

Rules that are fair and just
must apply equally to all,
ignoring social status.

BEFORE
c.380 BCE Plato discusses the
nature of justice and the just
society in The Republic.

1762 Jean-Jacques Rousseau
writes The Social Contract.
His views are later adopted
by French revolutionaries.
AFTER
1974 Robert Nozick criticizes
Rawls original position in
his inuential book Anarchy,
State, and Utopia.
2001 Rawls defends his views
in his last book, Justice as
Fairness: A Restatement.

This requires
rules.

The principles of justice
should be chosen behind
a veil of ignorance.

1651 Thomas Hobbes sets out
a theory of social contract in
his book Leviathan.
1689 John Locke develops
Hobbess theory in his Second
Treatise of Government.

To do this we need
to work together.

We all want to further
our own interests.

I

n his book A Theory of Justice,
rst published in 1971, political
philosopher John Rawls argues
for a re-evaluation of justice in
terms of what he calls justice as
fairness. His approach falls into
the tradition known as social
contract theory, which sees the rule
of law as a form of contract that
individuals enter into because it
yields benets that exceed what
they can attain individually. Rawls
version of this theory involves a
thought experiment in which people
are made ignorant of their place in
society, or placed in what he calls
the original position in which the

social contract is made. From this
Rawls establishes principles of
justice on which, he claims, all
rational beings should agree.

The original position
Imagine that a group of strangers is
marooned on a desert island, and
that, after giving up hope of being
rescued, they decide to start a new
society from scratch. Each of the
survivors wants to further their
own interests, but each also sees
that they can only do so by working
together in some wayin other
words, by forming a social contract.
The question is: how do they go

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 295
See also: Plato 5055  Thomas Hobbes 11215  John Locke 13033
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 15459  Noam Chomsky 30405

about establishing the principles
of justice? What rules do they lay
down? If they are interested in a
truly rational and impartial justice,
then there are countless rules that
have to be discounted immediately.
For example, the rule If your name
is John, you must always eat last,
is neither rational nor impartial,
even if it may be to your advantage
if your name is John.
In such a position, says Rawls,
what we need to do is cast a veil
of ignorance over all the facts of
our lives, such as who we are, and
where we were born, and then ask
what kind of rules it would be best
for us to live by. Rawls point
is that the only rules that could
rationally be agreed on by all



parties are ones that genuinely
honor impartiality, and dont, for
example, take race, class, creed,
natural talent, or disability into
account. In other words, if I dont
know what my place in society will
be, rational self-interest compels
me to vote for a world in which
everyone is treated fairly.

Rationality versus charity
It is important to note that for
Rawls this is not a story about how
justice has actually arisen in the
world. Instead, he gives us a way
of testing our theories of justice
against an impartial benchmark. If
they fail to measure up, his point is
that it is our reason, and not simply
our charity, that has failed. 

The representation of
justice as a blindfolded
lady with a set of scales
expresses the idea that
no-one is above the law.

Lady Justice is
blind, and therefore
impartial.

John Rawls
John Rawls was born in 1921
in Maryland, USA. He studied
at Princeton University, then
joined the army and served in
the Pacic during World War II.
After the war, in which he
saw the ruins of Hiroshima,
he resigned from the army
and returned to studying
philosophy, earning his PhD
from Princeton in 1950.
Rawls undertook further
study at Oxford University,
where he met philosopher
Isaiah Berlin, before returning
to the US to teach. After a
period at Cornell and MIT, he
moved to Harvard, where he
wrote A Theory of Justice.
While at Harvard, he also
taught up-and-coming
philosophers Thomas Nagel
and Martha Nussbaum.
In 1995 Rawls suffered
the rst of several strokes,
but continued working until
his death in 2002.
Key works

The scales of
justice represent
equality.
Punishment is
the same for all.

1971 A Theory of Justice
1993 Political Liberalism
1999 The Law of Peoples
2000 Lectures on the History
of Moral Philosophy
2001 Justice as Fairness:
A Restatement

296

ART IS A
FORM OF LIFE
RICHARD WOLLHEIM (19232003)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Aesthetics
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
c.380 BCE Platos Republic
explores the relationship
between art forms and
political institutions.
1953 Ludwig Wittgensteins
Philosophical Investigations
introduces and explores his
concept of forms of life.
1964 Arthur Danto publishes
his philosophical essay
The Artworld, which analyzes
artistic endeavor from an
institutional viewpoint.
AFTER
1969 American philosopher
George Dickie develops further
the institutional theory of
artistic creativity in his
essay Dening Art.

T

he British philosopher of
art, Richard Wollheim,
believes that we should
resist the tendency to see art as
an abstract idea that needs to be
analyzed and explained. If we are
to fully understand art, he believes,
we must always dene it in relation
to its social context. By describing
art as a form of life, in Art and
its Objects (1968), he uses a term
coined by the Austrian-born
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein
to describe the nature of language.
For Wittgenstein, language is a
form of life, because the way we
use it is always a reection of our
individual experiences, habits, and
skills. He is attempting to resist the
tendency of philosophy to make
simplistic generalizations about
language and instead is pointing to
the many different roles language
plays in our lives.

Social setting
Wollheim is making the same point
as Wittgenstein, but in relation to
works of art. Artists, he states, are
conditioned by their contexttheir
See also: Plato 5055



What we consider art may depend
on the context in which we view it.
Andy Warhols 32 Campbells Soup
Cans creates ne art from images
usually associated with commerce.

beliefs, histories, emotional
dispositions, physical needs,
and communitiesand the world
that they interpret is a world of
constant change. For Wollheim, one
implication of this is that there can
be no general artistic impulse or
instinct for the creation of art
that is totally independent of the
institutions in which it operates. 

Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 297

ANYTHING GOES
PAUL FEYERABEND (19241994)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Philosophy of science
APPROACH
Analytic philosophy
BEFORE
1934 In The Logic of Scientic
Discovery, Karl Popper denes
falsiability as a criterion for
any scientic theory.
1962 Thomas Kuhn introduces
the idea of paradigm shifts
in science in The Structure of
Scientic Revolutions.
1960s and early 1970s
Feyerabend develops his ideas
in discussion with his friend
and fellow philosopher of
science, Imre Lakatos.
AFTER
From 1980s Feyerabends
ideas contribute to the theories
of the mind proposed by
American philosophers
Patricia and Paul Churchland.

B

orn in Austria, Feyerabend
became a student of Karl
Popper at the London
School of Economics, but he went
on to depart signicantly from
Poppers rational model of science.
During his time at the University of
California in the 1960s and 1970s,
Feyerabend became friendly with
the German-born philosopher
Thomas Kuhn, who argued that
scientic progress is not gradual,
but always jumps in paradigm
shifts or revolutions that lead to
whole new frameworks for scientic
thinking. Feyerabend goes even
further, suggesting that when this
occurs, all the scientic concepts
and terms are altered, so there is no
permanent framework of meaning.

Anarchy in science
Feyerabends most famous book
Against Method: Outline of an
Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge,
was rst published in 1975. Here
he sets out his vision of what he
calls epistemological anarchism.
Epistemology is the branch of
philosophy that deals with
See also: Karl Popper 26265



questions and theories about
knowledge, and Feyerabends
anarchism is rooted in the idea
that all of the methodologies used
in the sciences are limited in
scope. As a result, there is no such
thing as scientic method. If we
look at how science has developed
and progressed in practice, the only
method that we can discern is
that anything goes. Science,
Feyerabend maintains, has never
progressed according to strict
rules, and if the philosophy of
science demands such rules, it
will limit scientic progress. 

Science and myth
overlap in many ways.
Paul Feyerabend

Thomas Kuhn 293

298

KNOWLEDGE
IS PRODUCED
TO BE SOLD

JEAN-FRANCOIS LYOTARD (19241998)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Postmodernism
BEFORE
1870s The term postmodern
is rst used in the context of
art criticism.

T

he idea that knowledge
is produced to be sold
appears in Jean-Franois
Lyotards book The Postmodern
Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
The book was originally written
for the Council of Universities in
Quebec, Canada, and the use of
the term postmodern in its title
is signicant. Although Lyotard
did not invent the term, which had

193945 Technological
advances in World War II lay
the ground for the computer
revolution of the 20th century.
1953 Ludwig Wittgenstein
writes in his Philosophical
Investigations about language
gamesan idea that Lyotard
uses to develop his idea of
meta-narratives.
AFTER
1984 American literary critic
Fredric Jameson writes
Postmodernism, or the Cultural
Logic of Late Capitalism.
From 1990s The World Wide
Web offers unprecedented
access to information.

been used by various art critics
since the 1870s, his book was
responsible for broadening its range
and increasing its popularity. His
use of the word in the title of this
book is often said to mark the
beginning of postmodern thought.
The term postmodernism
has since been used in so many
different ways that it is now hard
to know exactly what it means,

Computer technology has
changed knowledge into
information that is

stored in vast
databases.

owned by large
corporations.

This information is judged
by its commercial value,
not by its truth.

Knowledge is
produced to be sold.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 299
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471  Georg Hegel 17885
Martin Heidegger 25255  Gilles Deleuze 338



Friedrich Nietzsche 21421



Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651



When knowledge becomes data it is
no longer the indenable matter of
minds, but a commodity that can be
transferred, stored, bought, or sold.

but Lyotards denition is very
clear. Postmodernism, he writes,
is a matter of incredulity towards
meta-narratives. Meta-narratives
are overarching, single stories that
attempt to sum up the whole of
human history, or that attempt to
put all of our knowledge into a
single framework. Marxism (the
view that history can be seen as a
series of struggles between social
classes) is an example of a metanarrative. Another is the idea that
humanitys story is one of progress
toward deeper knowledge and
social justice, brought about by
greater scientic understanding.

Externalized knowledge
Our incredulity toward these metanarratives implies a new scepticism.
Lyotard suggests that this is due to
a shift in the way we have related
to knowledge since World War II,
and to the huge change in the

Jean-Franois Lyotard

technologies we use to deal with
it. Computers have fundamentally
transformed our attitudes, as
knowledge has become information
that can be stored in databases,
moved to and fro, and bought and
sold. This is what Lyotard calls the
mercantilization of knowledge.
This has several implications.
The rst, Lyotard points out, is that
knowledge is becoming externalized.
It is no longer something that helps
toward the development of minds;
something that might be able to
transform us. Knowledge is also

becoming disconnected from
questions of truth. It is being judged
not in terms of how true it is, but in
terms of how well it serves certain
ends. When we cease to ask
questions about knowledge such
as is it true? and start asking
questions such as how can this
be sold?, knowledge becomes a
commodity. Lyotard is concerned
that once this happens, private
corporations may begin to seek to
control the ow of knowledge, and
decide who can access what types
of knowledge, and when. 

Jean-Franois Lyotard was born
in Versailles, France in 1924. He
studied philosophy and literature
at the Sorbonne, Paris, becoming
friends with Gilles Deleuze. After
graduating, he taught philosophy
in schools for several years in
France and Algeria.
Lyotard became involved
in radical left-wing politics in the
1950s, and was a well-known
defender of the 195462 Algerian
revolution, but his philosophical
development ultimately led him
to become disillusioned with the
meta-narratives of Marxism. In
the 1970s he began working as

a university professor, teaching
philosophy rst at the Sorbonne
and then in many other
countries around the world,
including the US, Canada,
Brazil, and France. Lyotard
retired as Professor Emeritus at
the University of Paris VIII, and
died of leukemia in 1998.
Key works
1971 Discourse, Figure
1974 Libidinal Economy
1979 The Postmodern Condition:
A Report on Knowledge
1983 The Differend

300

FOR THE BLACK MAN,
THERE IS ONLY
ONE DESTINY
AND
IT
IS
WHITE
FRANTZ FANON (19251961)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Existentialism
BEFORE
4th century BCE Aristotle
argues in the Nicomachean
Ethics that slavery is a
natural state.
19th century Africa is
partitioned and colonized
by European countries.
1930s The French ngritude
movement calls for a unied
black consciousness.
AFTER
1977 Steve Biko, an antiapartheid activist inspired
by Fanon, dies in police
custody in South Africa.
1978 Edward Said, inuenced
by Fanons work, writes
Orientalism, a post-colonial
study of Western perspectives
on the Middle East in the
19th century.

P

hilosopher and psychiatrist
Frantz Fanon rst published
his psychoanalytic study of
colonialism and racism, Black Skin,
White Masks, in 1952. In the book
Fanon attempts to explore the
psychological and social legacy
of colonialism among non-white
communities around the world.
In saying that for the black
man, there is only one destiny,
and this destiny is white, Fanon is
saying at least two things. First,
he says that the black man wants
to be like the white man; that is,
the aspirations of many colonized

White colonial cultures
equate blackness
with inferiority.

The only escape is
to reject blackness.

peoples have been formed by
the dominant colonial culture.
European colonial cultures tended
to equate blackness with
impurity, which shaped the selfview of those who were subject
to colonial rule, so that they came
to see the color of their skin as
a sign of inferiority.
The only way out of this
predicament seems to be an
aspiration to achieve a white
existence; but this will always fail,
because the fact of having dark
skin will always mean that one will
fail to be accepted as white. For

Colonized people want
to escape from this
inferior position.

Colonized people start
to take on the assumed
superiority of colonial cultures.

For the black man
there is only one
destiny. And it is white.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 301
See also: Aristotle 5663



Jean-Paul Sartre 26871

There is a fact:
White men consider
themselves superior
to black men.
Frantz Fanon

Fanon, this aspiration to achieve
a white existence not only fails
to address racism and inequality,
but it also masks or even condones
these things by implying that there
is an unarguable superiority to
white existence.
At the same time, Fanon is
saying something more complex.
It might be thought that, given this
tendency to aspire to a kind of
white existence, the solution would
be to argue for an independent view
of what it means to be black. Yet
this, too, is subject to all kinds of
problems. Elsewhere in his book,

Frantz Fanon
Frantz Fanon was born in 1925
in Martinique, a Caribbean
island that was at that time a
French colony. He left Martinique
to ght with the Free French
Forces in World War II, after
which he studied both medicine
and psychiatry in Lyon, France.
He also attended lectures on
literature and philosophy,
including those given by the
philosopher Merleau-Ponty. The
young Fanon had thought of
himself as French, and the
racism he encountered on rst



Maurice Merleau-Ponty 27475

Fanon writes that the black mans
soul is a white mans artefact. In
other words, the idea of what it
means to be black is the creation
of patterns of fundamentally racist
European thought.
Here Fanon is, in part, responding
to what was known in France as
the ngritude (or blackness)
movement. This was a movement of
French and French-speaking black
writers from the 1930s who wanted
to reject the racism and colonialism
of mainstream French culture, and
argued for an independent, shared
black culture. But Fanon believes
that this idea of ngritude is one
that fails to truly address the
problems of racism that it seeks to
overcome, because the way that it
thinks about blackness simply
repeats the fantasies of mainstream
white culture.



Edward Said 321

address these injustices. I nd
myself in the world and I recognize
that I have one right alone, Fanon
writes at the end of his book; that
of demanding human behavior from
the other. Fanons thought has been
of widespread importance in anticolonial and anti-racist movements,
and has inuenced social activists
such as anti-apartheid campaigner
Steve Biko and scholars such as
Edward Said. 

Human rights
In one sense, Fanon believes that
the solution can only come when
we move beyond racial thinking;
that if we remain trapped within
the idea of race we cannot ever
entering France surprised him. It
played a huge role in shaping his
philosophy, and one year after
qualifying as a psychiatrist in
1951, he published his book Black
Skin, White Masks.
In 1953 Fanon moved to
Algeria where he worked as a
hospital psychiatrist. After two
years of hearing his patients
tales of the torture they endured
during the 195462 Algerian War
of Independence, he resigned his
government-funded post, moved
to Tunisia, and began working
for the Algerian independence
movement. In the late 1950s, he

The inferiority associated with being
black led many colonized people to
adopt the mother countrys cultural
standards, says Fanon, and even to
aspire to a white existence.

developed leukemia. During his
illness, he wrote his nal book,
The Wretched of the Earth,
arguing for a different world. It
was published in the year of his
death with a preface by JeanPaul Sartre, a friend who had
rst inuenced Fanon, then
been inuenced by him.
Key works
1952 Black Skin, White Masks
1959 A Dying Colonialism
1961 The Wretched of the Earth
1969 Toward the African
Revolution (collected short works)

302

MAN IS AN
INVENTION OF
RECENT DATE
MICHEL FOUCAULT (19261984)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Discursive archaeology
BEFORE
Late 18th century Immanuel
Kant lays the foundation for the
19th-century model of man.
1859 Charles Darwins On
the Origin of Species causes
a revolution in how we
understand ourselves.
1883 Friedrich Nietzsche,
in Thus Spoke Zarathustra,
announces that man is
something to be surpassed.
AFTER
1991 Daniel Dennetts
Consciousness Explained
calls into question many of
our most cherished notions
about consciousness.
1991 American philosopher
Donna Haraways A Cyborg
Manifesto attempts to imagine
a post-human future.

We treat the idea
of man or humankind
as if it is a natural
and eternal idea.

Man is an
invention of
recent date.

T

he idea that man is an
invention of recent date
appears in The Order of
Things: An Archaeology of the
Human Sciences by French
philosopher Michel Foucault. To
understand what Foucault means
by this, we need to know what he
means by archaeology, and why he
thinks that we should apply it
to the history of thought.
Foucault is interested in how
our discoursethe way in which
we talk and think about things
is formed by a set of largely
unconscious rules that arise out of
the historical conditions in which

But an archaeology of our
thinking shows that the idea
of man arose as an object of
study at the beginning
of the 19th century.

we nd ourselves. What we take to
be the common sense background
to how we think and talk about the
world is in fact shaped by these rules
and these conditions. However, the
rules and conditions change over
time, and consequently so do our
discourses. For this reason, an
archaeology is needed to unearth
both the limits and the conditions
of how people thought and talked
about the world in previous ages.
We cannot take concepts that we
use in our present context (for
example, the concept of human
nature) and assume that they are
somehow eternal, and that all we

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 303
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471  Friedrich Nietzsche 21421
Maurice Merleau-Ponty 27475  Daniel Dennett 339



Martin Heidegger 25255

The 19th century saw a revolution in
anatomy, as shown in this illustration
from a medical text book. Foucault
believes that our modern concept of
man dates from this period.

need is a history of ideas to trace
their genealogy. For Foucault, it is
simply wrong to assume that our
current ideas can be usefully
applied to any previous point in
history. The ways in which we use
the words man, mankind, and
human nature, Foucault believes,
are examples of this.
The roots of this idea lie rmly
in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant,
who turned philosophy on its head

Michel Foucault

by abandoning the old question
Why is the world the way it is?
and asking Why do we see the
world the way we do? We take our
idea of what it is to be human as
fundamental and unchanging, but
it is in fact only a recent invention.
Foucault locates the beginning of
our particular idea of man at the
beginning of the 19th century,
around the time of the birth of the
natural sciences. This idea of man
is, Foucault considers, paradoxical:
we see ourselves both as objects in
the world, and so as objects of study,
and as subjects who experience and
study the worldstrange creatures
that look in two directions at once.



endone that may soon be erased
like a face drawn in the sand at
the edge of the sea.
Is Foucault right? In a time of
rapid advances in computing and
human-machine interfaces, and
when philosophers informed by
cognitive science, such as Daniel
Dennett and Dan Wegner, are
questioning the very nature of
subjectivity, it is hard not to feel
that, even if the face in the sand is
not about to be erased, the tide is
lapping alarmingly at its edges. 

Man is neither the oldest nor
the most constant problem
that has been posed for
human knowledge.
Michel Foucault

The human self-image
Foucault suggests that not only is
this idea of man an invention of
recent date, it is also an invention
that may be close to coming to its
Foucault was born in Poitiers,
France, in 1926 to a family of
doctors. After World War II, he
entered the cole Normale
Suprieure, where he studied
philosophy under Maurice
Merleau-Ponty. In 1954 he spent
time in Uppsala, Sweden, and
then lived for a time both in
Poland and Germany, only
returning to France in 1960.
He received a PhD in 1961 for
his study A History of Madness,
which argued that the distinction
between madness and sanity is
not real, but a social construct.
After the month-long student

strikes in Paris of 1968, he
became involved in political
activism, and continued to
work both as a lecturer and an
activist for the rest of his life.
Key works
1961 A History of Madness
1963 The Birth of the Clinic:
An Archaeology of Medical
Perception
1966 The Order of Things:
An Archaeology of the
Human Sciences
1975 Discipline and Punish:
The Birth of the Prison

304

IF WE CHOOSE, WE CAN
LIVE IN A WORLD OF
COMFORTING
ILLUSION
NOAM CHOMSKY (1928)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Universalism
BEFORE
c.380 BCE In The Republic,
Plato claims that many of
us live in a world of illusion.
1739 David Hume publishes
A Treatise of Human Nature.
Though an empiricist, he
claims that there must be
some xed principles from
which morality derives.
1785 Immanuel Kant, in
his Groundwork of the
Metaphysic of Morals,
argues that morality should
be based on universality.

A

lthough originally famous
for his work in linguistics,
Noam Chomsky is today
best known for his analyses of
political power. Since the publication
of his rst political book, American
Power and the New Mandarins, in
1969, he has claimed that there is
often a mismatch between the way
that states exert power and the
rhetorical claims that they make. He
maintains that rhetorical claims by

If we assume that
our own government is
naturally more ethical
than other governments...

... we are choosing
to live in a world of
c mforting illusion..
co

To break with this
illusion we need to

Early 20th century John
Dewey argues that politics
is the shadow cast on society
by big business.
1971 John Rawls revives
Kants notion of universality
in his A Theory of Justice.

governments are not by themselves
sufcient for us to reach the truth
about political power. Governments
may speak the language of facts
as a way of justifying their actions,
but unless their claims are
supported by evidence, then they
are only illusions, and the actions
to which they lead lack justication.
If we are to understand more clearly
how states operate, it is necessary
to move beyond the battle between

... look at the evidence
for what our government
actually does.

... apply the same ethical
principles that we apply
to other governments
to our own.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 305
See also: Plato 5055  David Hume 14853
John Dewey 22831  John Rawls 29495

States are not moral agents;
people are.
Noam Chomsky

rival forms of rhetoric, and instead
to look at history, at institutional
structures, at ofcial policy
documents, and so forth.

Ethics and universality
Chomskys ethical analyses are
based on what he calls the
principle of universality. At root,
this principle is relatively simple.
It says that at the very least we
should apply to ourselves the same
standards that we apply to others.
This is a principle that Chomsky
claims has always been central to
any responsible system of ethics.
The central psychological insight
here is that we are fond of using
ethical language as a way of
protesting about others, but that we
are less inclined to pass judgment
on ourselves. Nevertheless, if we
claim to uphold any set of ethical or
moral standards, and if we wish to
be consistent, then we must apply
to others the standards we apply to
ourselves. In terms of government,
this means that we must analyze
our political actions rigorously,
instead of allowing ourselves to
be blinded by rhetoric.
This is both a moral and an
intellectual imperative. For Chomsky,
these are closely related. He points



Immanuel Kant 16471



out that if anyone making a moral
claim is also violating universality,
then their claim cannot be taken
seriously and should be rejected.
If we are to cut through the
rhetoric and examine political
morality in a rigorous fashion,
it seems that universality is a
necessary starting point. Some of
Chomskys specic claims about
the nature of global power have
caused considerable controversy,
but this does not invalidate his
central insight. For if we wish
to call his specic claims into
question, then we should do so in
the light of universality and of all
the available evidence. If his claims
turn out to be false, then they should
be rejected or modied; but if they
turn out to be true, then they
should be acted upon. 

Noam Chomsky
Chomsky was born in 1928
in Pennsylvania, USA, and
was raised in a multilingual
Jewish household. He studied
mathematics, philosophy, and
linguistics at the University
of Pennsylvania, where he
wrote a groundbreaking thesis
on philosophical linguistics.
In 1957, his book Syntactic
Structures secured his
reputation as one of the
leading gures in linguistics,
and revolutionized the eld.
Although continuing to
teach and publish in linguistics,
Chomsky became increasingly
involved in politics. He was a
prominent opponent of the
Vietnam War, which prompted
him to publish his critique of
US intellectual culture, The
Responsibility of Intellectuals,
in 1967. Today, he continues to
write and lecture on linguistics,
philosophy, politics, and
international affairs.
Key works

Uncle Sam, the personication of the
United States, is one of countless props
used by governments to foster public
support. Chomsky warns that such
images can distract us from the truth.

1967 The Responsibility of
Intellectuals
1969 American Power and the
New Mandarins
2001 9-11
2006 Failed States: The Abuse
of Power and the Assault
on Democracy

306

SOCIETY IS
DEPENDENT UPON
A CRITICISM OF ITS
OWN
TRADITIONS
JURGEN HABERMAS (1929 )
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Social theory
BEFORE
1789 The French Revolution
begins, marking the end of
a representational power
structure in France.
1791 Jeremy Bentham
writes Of Publicity, an early
exploration of the idea of
the public.

A

ccording to the German
philosopher Jrgen
Habermas, modern society
depends not only on technological
advances, but also upon our ability
to criticize and reason collectively
about our own traditions. Reason,
says Habermas, lies at the heart
of our everyday communications.
Somebody says or does something,
and we say, Why did you do that?
or Why did you say that? We
continually ask for justications,
which is why Habermas talks
about communicative reason.

1842 Karl Marx writes his
essay On Freedom of the Press.
AFTER
1986 Edward Said criticizes
Habermas and the Frankfurt
School for their Eurocentric
views and their silence on
racist theory and imperialism.
1999 Canadian author Naomi
Kleins No Logo explores the
fate of the public sphere in an
era dominated by advertising
and the mass media.

Coffee houses became a focus of
social and political life in the major cities
of 18th-century Europe. Noted as places
where the dissaffected met, attempts
were frequently made to close them.

Reason, for him, is not about
discovering abstract truths, but
about the need we have to justify
ourselves to others.

Creating a public sphere
In the 1960s and 1970s, Habermas
concluded that there was a link
between communicative reason
and what he calls the public
sphere. Up until the 18th century,
he states, European culture was
largely representational, meaning
that the ruling classes sought to
represent themselves to their
subjects with displays of power
that required no justication, such
as impressive pageants or grand
architectural projects. But in the
18th century, a variety of public
spaces emerged that were outside
state control, including literary
salons and coffee houses. These
were places where individuals could
gather to engage in conversation or
reasoned debate. This growth of
the public sphere led to increased
opportunities to question the
authority of representational state
culture. The public sphere became
a third space, a buffer between
the private space of our immediate
friends and family, and the space
occupied by state control.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 307
See also: Jeremy Bentham 174  Karl Marx 196203  Theodor Adorno 26667
Niklas Luhmann 339  Noam Chomsky 30405  Edward Said 321

By establishing a public sphere, we
also open up more opportunities for
recognizing that we have interests
in common with other private
individualsinterests that the
state may fail to serve. This can
lead to questioning the actions of
the state. Habermas believes that
the growth of the public sphere
helped to trigger the French
Revolution in 1789.
The expansion of the public
sphere, from the 18th century
onward, has led to a growth of
democratically elected political
institutions, independent courts,
and bills of rights. But Habermas
believes that many of these brakes
on the arbitrary use of power are
now under threat. Newspapers, for
example, can offer opportunities
for reasoned dialogue between
private individuals, but if the press
is controlled by large corporations,
such opportunities may diminish.
Informed debate on issues of
substance is replaced with
celebrity gossip, and we are
transformed from critical, rational
agents into mindless consumers. 

Jrgen Habermas



A societys traditions are
not necessarily in the best
interests of individuals.

Edgar Morin 338



Individuals need to be
able to question and
change these traditions.

They can do this by reasoning together
in the public sphere, which

builds
consensus.

brings about
change.

strengthens
society.

Society is dependent upon a
criticism of its own traditions.

Jrgen Habermas grew up in
Germany under the Nazi regime.
His realization that we had been
living in a criminal system,
following the Nuremburg trials
(194546), was to have a lasting
effect on his philosophy.
On completing his doctorate in
1954, he studied with members of
the Frankfurt School, including
Max Horkheimer and Theodor
Adorno. During the 1960s and
1970s, he lectured at universities
in Bonn and Gottingen. In 1982, he
became Professor of Philosophy at
the University at Frankfurt, where
he taught until his retirement in

1993. More recently, Habermas
has himself taken an active role
in the public sphere, entering
into debates on Holocaust denial
and global terrorism.
Key works
1962 The Structural
Transformation of the
Public Sphere
1981 The Theory of
Communicative Action
1985 The Philosophical
Discourse of Modernity
2005 Between Naturalism
and Religion

THERE IS
NOTHING
OUTSIDE OF THE TEXT
JACQUES DERRIDA (19302004)

310 JACQUES DERRIDA
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Deconstruction
BEFORE
4th century BCE Platos Meno
explores the idea of aporia.
Early 20th century Charles
Sanders Peirce and Ferdinand
de Saussure begin the study of
signs and symbols (semiotics),
which would become a key
inuence on Of Grammatology.
1961 Emmanuel Levinas
publishes Totality and Innity,
which Derrida would respond
to in Writing and Difference.
Levinas becomes a growing
inuence in Derridas later
explorations of ethics.
AFTER
1992 English philosopher
Simon Critchleys Ethics of
Deconstruction explores
aspects of Derridas work.

J

acques Derrida remains one
of the most controversial
20th-century philosophers.
His name is associated, rst and
foremost, with deconstruction,
a complex and nuanced approach
to how we read and understand the
nature of written texts. If we are to
understand what Derrida means
when he says in his famous book
Of Grammatology that there is
nothing outside of the text (the
original French is il ny a pas de
hors-texte, also translated as
there is no outside-text), we need
to take a closer look at Derridas
deconstructive approach in general.

We are all mediators,
translators.
Jacques Derrida

Often when we pick up a book,
whether a philosophy book or a
novel, we imagine that what we
have in our hands is something
that we can understand or interpret
as a relatively self-contained whole.
When it comes to philosophical
texts, we might be expected to
imagine that these are especially
systematic and logical. Imagine
that you go into a bookshop and
pick up a copy of Of Grammatology.
You would think that, if you were to
read the book, by the end of it you
would have a reasonable grasp of
what grammatology itself might
be, what Derridas main ideas were
on the subject, and what this said
about the world. But, for Derrida,
texts do not work in this way.

Derrida aims to broaden our
understanding of what texts are
and what they do, and to show the
complexity that lies behind even
the most apparently simple works.
Deconstruction is a way of reading
texts to bring these hidden
paradoxes and contradictions out
into the open. This is not, however,
just a matter of how we read
philosophy and literature; there are
much broader implications to
Derridas approach that bring into
question the relationship between
language, thought, and even ethics.
At this point, it would help to
introduce an important technical
term from Derridas vocabulary:
diffrance. This may look like a
typographical errorand indeed,
when the term diffrance rst
entered the French dictionary, the
story goes that even Derridas
mother sternly said to him, But
Jacques, that is not how you spell
it! But in fact diffrance is a word
that Derrida coined himself to point
to a curious aspect of language.
Diffrance (with an a) is a
play both on the French diffrence
(with an e), meaning to differ,
and the French defrrer meaning
to defer. To understand how this

Aporia and diffrance
Even the most straightforward
texts (and Of Grammatology is not
one such text) are riddled with
what Derrida calls aporias. The
word aporia comes from the
Ancient Greek, where it means
something like contradiction,
puzzle, or impasse. For Derrida,
all written texts have such gaps,
holes, and contradictions and his
method of deconstruction is a way
of reading texts while looking out
for these puzzles and impasses. In
exploring these contradictions as
they appear in different texts,

A typesetter can check plates of type
closely before they are printed, but the
ideas they express are full of aporias,
or contradictions, says Derrida, which
no amount of analysis can eliminate.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 311
See also: Plato 5055  Charles Sanders Peirce 205  Ferdinand de Saussure 223
Louis Althusser 338  Ren Girard 338  Michel Foucault 30203



Emmanuel Levinas 273



I try to explain what Derrida
means when he says that there
is nothing outside of the text.

But I can never completely
explain the idea because

The meaning of what we write is,
for Derrida, changed by what we write
next. Even the deceptively simple act
of writing a letter can lead to a deferral
of meaning in the text itself.

word works, it would be useful to
consider how this deferring and
differing might actually take place
in practice. Let us start with
deferring. Imagine that I say The
cat, then I add, that my friend
saw. After a pause, I say, in the
garden was black and white,
and so on. The precise meaning of
the word cat as I am using it is
continually deferred, or put off, as
more information is given. If I had
been cut off after saying The cat
and had not mentioned my friend
or the garden, the meaning of cat
would have been different. The
more I add to what I say, in other
words, the more the meaning of
what I have already said is revised.
Meaning is deferred in language.
But there is something else
going on as well. The meaning of
cat, Derrida believes, cannot be
considered as something that rests
in the relationship between my
words and actual things in the
world. The word takes its 

the meaning of
what I say depends on
what I (or others) go
on to say later.

the meaning of the
words I use depends
on their relationship
to the words I am
not using.

So meaning is
always incomplete.

So I say more to
clarify things.

In this way, my explanation
of Derridas idea can
grow until it is innitely
large, and I realize...

there is
nothing outside
of the text.

312 JACQUES DERRIDA

We think only in signs.
Jacques Derrida

meaning from its position in a whole
system of language. So when I say
cat, this is meaningful not because
of some mysterious link between
the word and an actual cat, but
because this term differs from, for
example, dog or lion or zebra.
Taken together, these two
ideas of deferring and differing
say something quite strange about
language in general. On the one
hand, the meaning of anything we
say is ultimately always deferred,
because it depends on what else
we say; and the meaning of that,
in turn, depends on what else we
say, and so on. And on the other
hand, the meaning of any particular
term we use depends on all the
things that we dont mean. So
meaning is not self-contained
within the text itself.

The written word
For Derrida, diffrance is an aspect
of language that we become aware
of thanks to writing. Since ancient
Greek times, philosophers have
been suspicious of written
language. In Platos dialogue, the
Phaedrus, Socrates tells a legend
about the invention of writing, and
says that writing provides only the
appearance of wisdom and not its
reality. Writing, when philosophers
have thought about it at all, has
tended to be seen simply as a pale
reection of the spoken word; the

latter has been taken as the primary
means of communication. Derrida
wants to reverse this; according to
him, the written word shows us
something about language that the
spoken word does not.
The traditional emphasis on
speech as a means of transmitting
philosophical ideas has fooled us
all, Derrida believes, into thinking
that we have immediate access to
meaning. We think that meaning is
about presencewhen we speak
with another person, we imagine
that they make their thoughts
present for us, and that we are
doing the same for them. If there is
any confusion, we ask the other
person to clarify. And if there are
any puzzles, or aporias, we either
ask for clarication, or these simply
slide past us without our noticing.
This leads us to think that meaning
in general is about presenceto
think, for example, that the real
meaning of cat can be found in
the presence of a cat on my lap.
But when we deal with a
written text, we are freed from this
nave belief in presence. Without
the author there to make their
excuses and explain for us, we start
to notice the complexities and the

puzzles and the impasses. All of a
sudden, language begins to look
a little more complicated.

Questioning meaning
When Derrida says that there is
nothing outside of the text, he does
not mean that all that matters is the
world of books, that somehow the
world of esh and bone does not
matter. Nor is he trying to play
down the importance of any social
concerns that might lie behind the
text. So what exactly is he saying?
First, Derrida is suggesting that
if we take seriously the idea that
meaning is a matter of diffrance,
of differing and of deferring, then
if we want to engage with the
question of how we ought think
about the world, we must always
keep alive to the fact that meaning
is never as straightforward as we
think it is, and that this meaning
is always open to being examined
by deconstruction.
Second, Derrida is suggesting
that in our thinking, our writing,
and our speaking, we are always
implicated in all manner of political,
historical, and ethical questions
that we may not even recognize or
acknowledge. For this reason, some

Derridas own thesis that there is nothing
outside of the text is open to be analyzed
using his own deconstructive methods.
Even the idea as explained in this book
is subject to diffrance.

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 313

Jacques Derrida

Derrida registered his opposition
to the Vietnam War in a lecture given
in the US in 1968. His involvement in
numerous political issues and debates
informed much of his later work.

philosophers have suggested that
deconstruction is essentially an
ethical practice. In reading a text
deconstructively, we call into
question the claims that it is
making, and we open up difcult
ethical issues that may have
remained hidden. Certainly in
his later life, Derrida turned his
attention to some of the very real
ethical puzzles and contradictions
that are raised by ideas such as
hospitality and forgiveness.

latters response to this, perhaps,
might be to say that the idea of
having a thesis is itself based on
the idea of presence that he is
attempting to call into question.
This may seem like dodging the
issue; but if we take Derridas idea
seriously, then we have to admit
that the idea that there is nothing
outside of the text is itself not
outside of the text. To take this
idea seriously, then, is to treat it
sceptically, to deconstruct it, and
to explore the puzzles, impasses,
and contradictions thataccording
to Derrida himselflurk within it. 

Critics of Derrida
Given that Derridas idea is based
on the notion that meaning can
never be completely present in the
text, it is perhaps not surprising
that Derridas work can often be
difcult. Michel Foucault, one of
Derridas contemporaries, attacked
Derridas thinking for being wilfully
obscure; he protested that often it
was impossible to say exactly what
Derridas thesis actually was. The

I never give in
to the temptation to
be difcult just for the
sake of being difcult.
Jacques Derrida

Jacques Derrida was born to
Jewish parents in the then
French colony of Algeria. He
was interested in philosophy
from an early age, but also
nurtured dreams of becoming
a professional soccer player.
Eventually it was philosophy
that won out and, in 1951, he
entered the cole Normale
Suprieure in Paris. There he
formed a friendship with Louis
Althusser, also of Algerian
origin, who, like Derrida, went
on to become one of the most
prominent thinkers of his day.
The publication in 1967 of
Of Grammatology, Writing and
Difference, and Speech and
Phenomena sealed Derridas
international reputation. A
regular visiting lecturer at a
number of European and
American universities, he took
up the post of Professor of
Humanities at the University
of California, Irvine, in 1986.
His later work increasingly
focused on issues of ethics,
partly due to the inuence
of Emmanuel Levinas.
Key works
1967 Of Grammatology
1967 Writing and Difference
1967 Speech and Phenomena
1994 The Politics of Friendship

THERE IS NOTHING

DEEP DOWN INSIDE US

EXCEPT

WHAT WE HAVE PUT THERE

OURSELVES
RICHARD RORTY (19312007)

316 RICHARD RORTY
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Pragmatism
BEFORE
5th century BCE Socrates
disputes the nature of justice,
goodness, and other concepts
with the citizens of Athens.
4th century BCE Aristotle
writes a treatise on the nature
of the soul.
1878 Charles Sanders Peirce
coins the term pragmatism.
1956 American philosopher
Wilfrid Sellars publishes
Empiricism and the Philosophy
of Mind, calling into question
the myth of the given.
AFTER
1994 South-African-born
philosopher John McDowell
publishes Mind and World, a
book strongly inuenced by
Rortys work.

T

he soul is a curious thing.
Even if we cannot say
much about our souls or
describe what a soul is like, many
of us nonetheless hold rmly to
the belief that, somewhere deep
down, we each have such a thing.
Not only this, we might claim that
this thing is the fundamental self
(me) and, at the same time, is
somehow connected directly with
the truth or reality.
The tendency to picture
ourselves as possessing a kind of
doublea soul or a deep self that
uses Realitys own languageis
explored by American philosopher
Richard Rorty in the introduction
to his book, The Consequences of
Pragmatism (1982). Rorty argues
that, to the extent that we have
such a thing at all, a soul is a
human invention; it is something
that we have put there ourselves.

Knowledge as a mirror
Rorty was a philosopher who worked
within the American tradition of
pragmatism. In considering a
statement, most philosophical
traditions ask is this true? , in
the sense of: does this correctly
represent the way things are?. But

Some theories of knowledge claim that we gain
knowledge by processing raw data like a camera
captures light, but Rorty says our perceptions
are tangled up with our beliefs, which we
impose on things in the world.

Philosophy makes
progress not by becoming
more rigorous but by
becoming more imaginative.
Richard Rorty

pragmatists consider statements in
quite a different way, asking instead:
what are the practical implications
of accepting this as true?
Rortys rst major book,
Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature, published in 1979, was an
attempt to argue against the idea
that knowledge is a matter of
correctly representing the world,
like some kind of mental mirror.
Rorty argues that this view of
knowledge cannot be upheld, for
two reasons. First, we assume that
our experience of the world is
directly given to uswe assume
that what we experience is the raw

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 317
See also: Socrates 4649
Jrgen Habermas 30607



Aristotle 5663

data of how the world is. Second,
we assume that once this raw data
has been collected, our reason (or
some other faculty of mind) then
starts to work on it, reconstructing
how this knowledge ts together
as a whole, and mirroring what is
in the world.
Rorty follows the philosopher
Wilfrid Sellars in claiming that
the idea of experience as given
is a myth. We cannot ever access
anything like raw datait is not
possible for us to experience a dog,
for instance, outside of thought or
language. We only become aware of
something through conceptualizing
it, and our concepts are learned
through language. Our perceptions
are therefore inextricably tangled up
with the habitual ways that we use
language to divide up the world.
Rorty suggests that knowledge
is not so much a way of mirroring
nature as a matter of conversation
and social practice. When we
decide what counts as knowledge,
our judgement rests not on how
strongly a fact correlates to the
world, so much as whether it is
something that society lets us
say. What we can and cannot
count as knowledge is therefore
limited by the social contexts that
we live in, by our histories, and by
what those around us will allow us
to claim. Truth, said Rorty, is
what your contemporaries let you
get away with saying.



Charles Sanders Peirce 205



William James 20609

John Dewey 22831

When we say I know in
my heart it is wrong

we assume there
is an eternal truth
about wrongness.

we assume that
the knowledge we have
is certain knowledge.

But we cannot nd
any eternal truths
about ethics.

But absolutely certain
knowledge of how things
are is not possible.

is a matter of conversation
and social practice.

Reasons for judgement
But does truth really reduce down to
a matter of what we can get away
with? Rorty is aware that there are
some disturbing implications here,
especially in questions of ethics.
Imagine, for instance, that I kidnap
my neighbors pet hamster and 



There is nothing
deep down inside us
except what we have
put there ourselves.



318 RICHARD RORTY

What sort of a world can
we prepare for our
great-grandchildren?
Richard Rorty

Using children as soldiers may seem
intrinsically wrong, but Rorty says there
are no ethical absolutes. Ethics is a
matter of doing our best, in solidarity
with others, to realize a better world.

subject it to all manner of cruel
tortures, simply for the fun of
hearing it squeak. We might all
agree that doing such a thing to the
poor hamster (or, for that matter,
doing such a thing to my neighbor)
is a morally blameable act. We
might claim that there is something
absolutely and fundamentally
wrong about doing such a thing to
another living being; and we might
all agree that we ought not let other
people get away with such things.
But when we look at the reasons
that we give for saying that this is
a morally blameable act, things
become interesting. For example,
imagine that you are asked by
a particularly awkward moral
philosopher why it is wrong to treat
hamsters (or horses, or humans)
in this way. At rst you might
suggest all manner of reasons. But
philosophy being what it is, and

moral philosophers being the kinds
of beings they are, you might nd
that for every reason you can think
of, your philosopher friend has a
counter-reason or leads you into
some kind of contradiction.
This is, in fact, precisely what
the philosopher Socrates did in
ancient Athens. Socrates wanted
to nd out what concepts such as
goodness and justice really
were, so he questioned people who
used these concepts, to nd out
whether they really knew what
these things were. As the dialogues
of Plato show, most of the people
Socrates talked to were surprisingly
unclear about what it was they
were actually talking about, despite
their earlier conviction that they
fully grasped the relevant concepts.
In the same way, after an hour or
two of being interrogated by a
modern-day Socrates about how
to treat hamsters, you might blurt
out in frustration the following
sentence: But I just know, in my
heart of hearts, that it is wrong!

My heart of hearts
We say or think this kind of thing
relatively frequently, but it is not
immediately clear what exactly we
mean. To examine the idea more
closely, we can break it down into
three parts. First, it seems that

when we say I know, in my heart
of hearts, that it is wrong, we are
speaking as if there is something
out there in the world that is
wrongness, and that this thing is
knowable. Or, as some philosophers
put it, we are speaking as if there
is an essence of wrongness to
which this particular instance
of wrongness corresponds.
Second, by saying that we just
know in our heart of hearts, we
imply that this mysterious entity
our heart of heartsis a thing
that, for reasons unknown, has a
particular grasp of truth.
Third, we seem to be speaking
as if there is a straightforward
relationship between our heart
of hearts and this wrongness
that lies out there in the world,
such that if we know something
in our heart of hearts, we can have
access to an absolutely certain kind
of knowledge. In other words, this
is just another version of the idea
that knowledge is a way of mirroring
the world. And this, Rorty believes,
is unacceptable.

A world without absolutes
In order for his beliefs to be
consistent, Rorty has to give up
on the idea of fundamental moral
truths. There can be no absolute
right or wrong if knowledge is

If we can rely on
one another, we need
not rely on anything else.
Richard Rorty

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 319
what society lets us say. Rorty
recognizes that this is a difcult
thing to accept. But is it necessary
to believe that on doing something
morally wrong you are betraying
something deep within you? Must
you believe that there is some
truth about life, or some absolute
moral law, that you are violating
in order to maintain even a shred of
human decency? Rorty thinks not.
He maintains that we are nite
beings, whose existence is limited
to a short time on Earth, and none
of us have a hotline to some deeper,
more fundamental moral truth.
However, this does not imply that
the problems of life have either
We do not need to believe in an
absolute moral law in order to live as
ethical beings. Conversation, social hope,
and solidarity with others allow us to
form a working denition of the good.

gone away or ceased to matter.
These problems are still with us,
and in the absence of absolute
moral laws we are thrown back
upon our own resources. We are
left, Rorty writes, with our loyalty
to other human beings clinging
together against the dark. There
is no absolute sense of rightness
and wrongness to be discovered.
So we simply have to hold on to
our hopes and loyalties, and
continue to participate in involved
conversations in which we talk
about these difcult issues.
Perhaps, Rorty is saying, these
things are enough: the humility
that comes from recognizing that
there is no absolute standard of
truth; the solidarity we have with
others; and our hopes that we may
be able to contribute to, and to
bequeath to those who come after
us, a world that is worth living in. 

Richard Rorty
Richard Rorty was born in
New York, USA in 1931. His
parents were political activists,
and Rorty describes his early
years as being spent reading
about Leon Trotsky, the
Russian revolutionary. He said
that he knew by the age of 12
that the point of being human
was to spend ones life ghting
social injustice. He began
attending the University of
Chicago early, at the age of 15,
going on to take a PhD at Yale
in 1956. He was then drafted
into the army for two years,
before becoming a professor.
He wrote his most important
book, Philosophy and the
Mirror of Nature, while
professor of philosophy at
Princeton. He wrote widely
on philosophy, literature, and
politics and, unusually for a
20th-century philosopher, drew
on both the so-called analytic
and the continental traditions.
Rorty died of cancer aged 75.
Key works
1979 Philosophy and the
Mirror of Nature
1989 Contingency, Irony,
and Solidarity
1998 Achieving Our Country
2001 Philosophy and Social
Hope

320

EVERY DESIRE
HAS A RELATION
TO
MADNESS
LUCE IRIGARAY (1932 )
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Feminism
BEFORE
1792 Mary Wollstonecrafts
A Vindication of the Rights of
Woman rst initiates serious
debate about the place of
women in society.
1890s Austrian psychologist
Sigmund Freud establishes
his psychoanalytic method,
which will greatly inuence
Irigarays work.
1949 Simone de Beauvoirs
The Second Sex explores
the implications of sexual
difference.
AFTER
1993 Luce Irigaray turns to
non-Western modes of thought
about sexual difference in
An Ethics of Sexual Difference.

T

he Belgian philosopher and
analyst Luce Irigaray is
concerned above all else
with the idea of sexual difference.
A former student of Jacques Lacan,
a psychoanalyst who famously
explored the linguistic structure
of the unconscious, Irigaray claims
that all language is essentially
masculine in nature.
In Sex and Genealogies (1993)
she writes: Everywhere, in
everything, mens speech, mens
values, dreams, and desires are
law. Irigarays feminist work can
be seen as a struggle to nd

One must assume the
feminine role deliberately.
Luce Irigaray

authentically female ways of
speaking and desiring that are
free from male-centeredness.

Wisdom and desire
To address this problem, Irigaray
suggests that all thinkingeven
the most apparently sober and
objective-sounding philosophy,
with its talk of wisdom, certainty,
rectitude, and moderationis
underpinned by desire. In failing
to acknowledge the desire that
underpins it, traditional malecentered philosophy has also failed
to acknowledge that beneath its
apparent rationality simmer all
manner of irrational impulses.
Irigaray suggests that each sex
has its own relationship to desire,
and as a result each sex has a
relation to madness. This calls
into question the long tradition
of equating maleness with this
rationality, and femaleness with
irrationality. It also opens the
way to the possibility of new
ways of writing and thinking
about philosophy, for both men
and women. 

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft 175  Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651 
Simone de Beauvoir 27677  Hlne Cixous 322  Julia Kristeva 323

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 321

EVERY EMPIRE TELLS
ITSELF AND THE WORLD
THAT IT IS UNLIKE ALL
OTHER EMPIRES
EDWARD SAID (19352003)

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Post-colonialism
BEFORE
19th century European
scholars research the histories
of their colonial subjects.
1940S In the aftermath of
World War II, the European
colonial empires begin to
fragment and collapse.

T

he Palestinian writer
Edward Said was one of
the 20th centurys foremost
critics of imperialism. In 1978 he
published Orientalism, which
explored how the depictions of
Islamic societies by 19th-century
European scholars were closely
related to the imperialist ideologies
of European states.
In his later work, Said remained
critical of all forms of imperialism,
past and present. He points out that
although we may be critical of
empires of the past, these empires
saw themselves as bringing

civilization to the worlda view
not shared by the people they
claimed to be helping. Empires
plunder and control, while masking
their abuses of power by talking
about their civilizing missions.
If this is the case, Said warns, we
should be wary of present-day
claims by any state undertaking
foreign interventions. 
The British Empire was one of many
19th-century empires that claimed
to believe it was bringing the benets
of civilization to the countries it
colonized, such as India.

1952 Frantz Fanon writes
Black Skin, White Masks, an
early study of the damage
caused by colonialism.
AFTER
1988 Indian philosopher
Gayatri Spivak publishes
Can the Subaltern Speak?
examining post-colonialism.
From 2000 Scholars such as
Noam Chomsky increasingly
interpret American global
power according to a model
of imperialism.

See also: Frantz Fanon 30001



Michel Foucault 30203



Noam Chomsky 30405

322

THOUGHT HAS
ALWAYS WORKED
BY
OPPOSITION
HELENE CIXOUS (1937 )
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Epistemology
APPROACH
Feminism
BEFORE
1949 Simone de Beauvoirs
The Second Sex explores the
philosophical implications of
sexual difference.
1962 French anthropologist
Claude Lvi-Strauss writes
The Savage Mind, a study of
binary oppositions in culture.
1967 Controversial French
philosopher Jacques Derrida
publishes Of Grammatology,
introducing the concept of
deconstruction, which Cixous
uses in her study of gender.
AFTER
1970s The French literary
movement of criture fminine
(womens writing) explores
appropriate use of language in
feminist thinking, taking its
inspiration from Cixous.

I

n 1975, the French poet,
novelist, playwright, and
philosopher Hlne Cixous
wrote Sorties, her inuential
exploration of the oppositions that
often dene the way we think
about the world. For Cixous, a
thread that runs through centuries
of thought is our tendency to group
elements of our world into opposing
pairs, such as culture/nature, day/
night, and head/heart. Cixous
claims that these pairs of elements
are always by implication ranked
hierarchically, underpinned by a
tendency to see one element as
being dominant or superior and
associated with maleness and
activity, while the other element or
weaker aspect is associated with
femaleness and passivity.

Time for change
Cixous believes that the authority
of this hierarchical pattern of
thinking is now being called into
question by a new blossoming of
feminist thought. She questions
what the implications of this
change might be, not only for our

Woman must write
herself and bring woman
into literature.
Hlne Cixous

philosophical systems, but also for
our social and political institutions.
Cixous herself, however, refuses to
play the game of setting up binary
oppositions, of victors and losers,
as a structural framework for our
thinking. Instead she conjures up
the image of millions of species
of mole as yet not recognized,
tunnelling away under the edices
of our world view. And what will
happen when these edices start to
crumble? Cixous does not say. It is
as if she is telling us that we can
make no assumptions, that the only
thing we can do is wait and see. 

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft 175  Simone de Beauvoir 27677 
Jacques Derrida 30813  Julia Kristeva 323  Martha Nussbaum 339

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 323

WHO PLAYS GOD
IN PRESENT-DAY
FEMINISM?
JULIA KRISTEVA (1941 )
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Feminism
BEFORE
1792 Mary Wollstonecrafts
A Vindication of the Rights
of Woman initiates serious
debate about the nature of the
roles women are conditioned
to play in society.
1807 Georg Hegel explores
the dialectic between
master and slave in
Phenomenology of Spirit.
1949 Simone de Beauvoirs
The Second Sex is published,
rapidly becoming a key text in
the French feminist movement.
AFTER
1999 In their book Fashionable
Nonsense, physics professors
Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont
criticize Kristevas misuse
of scientic language.

B

ulgarian-born philosopher
and psychoanalyst Julia
Kristeva is often regarded
as one of the leading voices in
French feminism. Nevertheless,
the question of whether, or in what
way, Kristeva is a feminist thinker
has been subject to considerable
debate. Part of the reason for this
is that for Kristeva herself, the very
notion of feminism is problematic.
Feminism has arisen out of the
conict women have had with
the structures that are associated
with male dominance or power.
Because of these roots, Kristeva
warns, feminism carries with it
some of the same male-centered
presuppositions that it is seeking
to question.
If the feminist movement is
to realize its goals fully, Kristeva
believes that it is essential for it to
be more self-critical. She warns
that by seeking to ght what she
calls the power principle of a
male-dominated world, feminism
is at risk of adopting yet another
form of this principle. Kristeva is
convinced that for any movement

to be successful in achieving true
emancipation, it must constantly
question its relationship to power
and established social systems
and, if necessary renounce belief
in its own identity. If the feminist
movement fails to take these steps,
Kristeva fears that it is in serious
danger of developing into little
more than an additional strand
in the ongoing game of power. 

Margaret Thatcher, like many
women who have achieved positions
of great power, modied her public
image to incorporate classic male
concepts of strength and authority.

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft 175  Georg Hegel 17885 
Simone de Beauvoir 27677  Hlne Cixous 322  Martha Nussbaum 339

324

PHILOSOPHY IS NOT
ONLY A WRITTEN
ENTERPRISE
HENRY ODERA ORUKA (19441995)
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Metaphilosophy
APPROACH
Ethnography
BEFORE
600400 BCE Greek thinkers
such as Thales, Pythagoras,
and Plato all study in Egypt,
Africa, which was a center of
philosophical study in the
ancient world.
AFTER
20th century After the retreat
of European colonial power,
African philosophy begins to
ourish across the continent.
The growth of anthropology
and ethnography also leads
to a deeper understanding
of indigenous traditions of
thought in Africa.
Late 20th century Ghanian
philosopher Kwasi Wiredu
argues that philosophic
sagacity and folk wisdom
must be distinguished from
philosophy proper.

H

enry Odera Oruka was
born in Kenya in 1944
and he was interested in
metaphilosophy, or philosophizing
about philosophy. In his book Sage
Philosophy (1994), he looks at why
philosophy in sub-Saharan Africa
has often been overlooked, and
concludes that it is because it is
primarily an oral tradition, while

Oruka claims that philosophy has
decreed the thoughts of certain races
to be more important than others, but it
must encompass the sayings of African
sages just as it does Greek sages.
See also: Socrates 4649



philosophers in general tend to work
with written texts. Some people
have claimed that philosophy is
necessarily connected with written
recording, but Oruka disagrees.
In order to explore philosophy
within the oral traditions of Africa,
Oruka proposed an approach that
he called philosophic sagacity. He
borrowed the ethnographic approach
of anthropology, where people are
observed in their everyday settings,
and their thoughts and actions
recorded in context. Oruka himself
traveled into villages and recorded
conversations with people who
were considered wise by their local
community. His aim was to nd out
whether they had systematic views
underpinning their perspectives.
Those sages who had critically
examined their ideas about
traditional philosophical topics,
such as God or freedom, and found
a rational foundation for them could,
Oruka believes, be considered
philosophic sages. These systematic
views deserve to be explored in
the light of wider philosophical
concerns and questions. 

Friedrich Schlegel 177



Jacques Derrida 30813

CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY 325

IN SUFFERING,
THE ANIMALS
ARE
OUR
EQUALS
PETER SINGER (1946 )
IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Ethics
APPROACH
Utilitarianism
BEFORE
c.560 BCE Indian sage and
Jainist leader Mahavira calls
for strict vegetarianism.
1789 Jeremy Bentham sets
out the theory of utilitarianism
in his book, Introduction to
the Principles of Morals and
Legislation, arguing: each to
count for one, and none for
more than one.
1863 In his book Utilitarianism,
John Stuart Mill develops
Benthams utilitarianism from
an approach that considers
individual acts to one that
considers moral rules.
AFTER
1983 American philosopher
Tom Regan publishes The
Case for Animal Rights.

T

he Australian philosopher
Peter Singer became known
as one of the most active
advocates of animal rights following
the publication of his book Animal
Liberation in 1975. Singer takes
a utilitarian approach to ethics,
following the tradition developed
by Englishman Jeremy Bentham in
the late 18th century.
Utilitarianism asks us to judge
the moral value of an act by the
consequences of that act. For
Bentham, the way to do this is by
calculating the sum of pleasure or
pain that results from our actions,
like a mathematical equation.

cause such pain. However, like
all utilitarians, Singer applies the
greatest happiness principle,
which says that we should make
decisions in such a way that they
result in the greatest happiness
for the greatest number. Singer
points out that he has never said
that no experiment on an animal
could ever be justied; rather that
we should judge all actions by their
consequences, and the interests
of animals count among those
consequences; they form part
of the equation. 

Animals are sentient beings
Singers utilitarianism is based
on what he refers to as an equal
consideration of interests. Pain, he
says, is pain, whether it is yours or
mine or anybody elses. The extent
to which non-human animals can
feel pain is the extent to which we
should take their interests into
account when making decisions
that affect their lives, and we
should refrain from activities that
See also: Jeremy Bentham 174



The value of life is a
notoriously difcult
ethical question.
Peter Singer

John Stuart Mill 19093

326

ALL THE BEST MARXIST
ANALYSES ARE ALWAYS
ANALYSES OF A FAILURE

SLAVOJ ZIZEK (1949 )

IN CONTEXT
BRANCH
Political philosophy
APPROACH
Marxism
BEFORE
1807 Georg Hegel publishes
The Phenomenology of the
Spirit, laying the groundwork
for Marxist thought.
1867 Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels publish their
Communist Manifesto.
1867 Marx publishes the rst
volume of Capital (Das Kapital),
a treatise on political economy.
1899 In The Interpretation
of Dreams, psychoanalyst
Sigmund Freud claims that
much of human behavior is
driven by unconscious forces.
1966 Psychoanalytical theorist
Jacques Lacan, one of ieks
major inuences, revisits
Freud's ideas in crits.

T

he idea that all the best
Marxist analyses have
traditionally been analyses
of failure appears in an interview
with Slovenian philosopher Slavoj
iek given in 2008. In this
interview, iek was asked about
the events in Czechoslovakia in
1968, when a period of reform,
aimed at decentralizing and
democratizing the country, was
brutally brought to an end by the
Soviet Union and its allies.
ieks claim is that the
crushing of the reforms became
the very thing that later sustained
a myth held by the political left
namely that, had the reforms gone
ahead, some kind of social and
political paradise would have
followed. According to iek, those
on the political left are prone to
dwelling on their failures, because
doing so allows myths to be
generated about what would have
happened if they had succeeded.
iek says that these failures allow
those on the left to maintain a safe
moralistic position, because their
failures mean that they are never in
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471
Martin Heidegger 25255



The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia
in 1968 led to the end of the short-lived
Prague Spring period of liberalization.
All moves toward democracy were
suppressed until 1989.

power, or truly tested by action.
He describes this stance as the
comfortable position of resistance,
which allows an avoidance of the
real issuessuch as re-evaluating
the nature of political revolution.
For iek, a dedicated Marxist,
serious questions about the nature
of political power are obscured
by endlessly trying to justify
utopia's elusiveness. 

Georg Hegel 17885



Karl Marx 196203



DIRECTO

RY

330

DIRECTORY
T

hough the ideas already presented in this book show the broad
range of philosophical thought expressed by some of historys
best minds, there are many more people who have helped to shape
the story of philosophy. Some of these thinkerssuch as Empedocles,
Plotinus, or William of Ockhamhave had ideas that form the starting
point for other, more well-known theories, and their inuence on later
philosophers is clear. Some, such as Friedrich Schelling or Gilles Deleuze,
have taken the works of previous philosophers and added an interesting
twist that sheds new light on the subject. Whatever their relationship is
to the history of philosophy, the people discussed below have all helped
to broaden the boundaries of philosophical thought.

ANAXIMANDER
c.610546 BCE

Born in Miletus, in what is now
southwest Turkey, Anaximander
was a pupil of Thales, the father
of Western philosophy. Like Thales,
he thought there was a single basic
substance from which everything
had evolved. He decided it must be
innite and eternal and called it
apeiron (indenite). Anaximander
also challenged Thales suggestion
that Earth was supported by a sea
of water, reasoning that this sea
would have to be supported by
something else. Lacking evidence
for this supporting structure, he
declared that Earth was an object
hanging in space. He went on to
publish what is believed to be
the rst map of the world.
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223

ANAXIMENES OF MILETUS
c.585528 BCE

Like other Milesian philosophers,
Anaximenes searched for the
fundamental material from which

the universe was made. He opted
for air, pointing out that just as air
gives life to the human body, so
a universal kind of air gives life
to the cosmos. He was the rst
thinker on record to use observed
evidence to support his ideas.
Blowing with pursed lips produced
cold air; with relaxed lips, warm
air. He argued, therefore, that
when something condenses, it
cools; when it expands it heats up.
Likewise, when air condenses, it
becomes visible; rst as mist, then
as rain, and ultimately, he believed,
as rock, thus giving birth to Earth.
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223

ANAXAGORAS
c.500428 BCE

Born in Ionia, off the southern coast
of present-day Turkey, Anaxagoras
played a key role in making Athens
the world center of philosophy and
scientic enquiry. Central to his
thinking were his views on the
material world and cosmology. He
reasoned that everything in the
material world was made up of a
small part of everything else,

otherwise it could not have come
into being. Sentenced to death for
impiety after insisting that the sun
was a ery rock, he ed Athens and
spent his nal years in exile.
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223

EMPEDOCLES
c.490430 BCE

Empedocles was a member of a
high-ranking political family in
the then-Greek colony of Sicily.
His knowledge of the natural world
led to him being credited with
miraculous powers, such as the
ability to cure diseases and control
the weather. He reasserted the
notion of Heraclitus that we live
in an ever-changing world, as
opposed to Parmenides theory
that everything is ultimately one
xed entity. He believed that four
elementsre, water, earth, and
aircontinually combine, move
apart, and recombine in a nite
number of ways. This idea remained
part of Western thinking up until
the Renaissance period.
See also: Thales of Miletus 2223
Heraclitus 40 Parmenides 41




DIRECTORY 331
ZENO OF ELEA

PLOTINUS

IAMBLICHUS

Little is known about Zeno of Elea,
other than his paradoxes of motion,
which are mentioned by Aristotle.
Zeno is thought to have produced
more than 40 of these, although only
a few survive. In them, he defended
the claim of his teacher Parmenides
that the changing and varied
world we perceive around us is not
realitywhich is in fact motionless,
uniform, and simple. Movement,
Zeno believed, is an illusion of the
senses. Each of his paradoxes
began from the position that he
wished to refutethat movement,
and hence change, is realthen
continued by revealing the
contradictory consequences that
lead to the rejection of this notion.
See also: Heraclitus 40
Parmenides 41 Aristotle 5663

Born in Egypt, Plotinus studied
in Alexandria, then considered
the intellectual hub of the world.
He later moved to Rome, where he
taught his own brand of Platonism,
known as Neo-Platonism. Plotinus
divided the cosmos into layers, with
the indenable source of all being
the Oneat the top, followed
by Mind, Soul, Nature, and nally
the Material World. He believed in
reincarnation and the immortality
of the soul; by striving for
enlightenment individuals could
achieve mystical union with the
One, and so escape the cycle of
rebirth. His ideas, presented in the
Enneads, were widely inuential,
particularly those that supported
Christianity, which was taking root
in the Roman Empire at the time.
See also: Siddhartha Gautama
3033 Plato 5055

A Syrian Neo-Platonist philosopher,
Iamblichus was reputedly born into
an inuential aristocratic family.
He founded a school near modernday Antioch, where he taught a
curriculum based mainly on
the ideas of Plato and Aristotle,
although he is best known for
his expansion of the theories of
Pythagoras, which he recorded
in his Collection of Pythagorean
Doctrines. Iamblichus introduced
the concept of the soul being
embodied in matter, both of which
he believed to be divine. Salvation,
or the return of the soul to its pure
immortal form, he stated, was
achieved through the performance
of specic religious rituals, and not
just the contemplation of abstract
ideas alone.
See also: Pythagoras 2629
Plato 5055 Plotinus 331

WANG BI

HYPATIA OF ALEXANDRIA

In 220 CE, the ruling Chinese Han
Dynasty collapsed, heralding an
era of moral confusion. Philosopher
Wang Bi helped to bring order to
this chaos by reconciling two
dominant schools of thought. He
argued that Daoist texts should
not be read literally, but more
like works of poetry, thus making
them compatible with the highly
practical Confucian ideals of
political and moral wisdom. His
fresh appraisals of Daoism and
Confucianism ensured the survival
of both, and paved the way for the
spread of Buddhism across China.
See also: Laozi 2425 Siddhartha
Gautama 3033 Confucius 3439

Hypatia taught mathematics,
astronomy, and philosophy at the
Museum of Alexandria, eventually
succeeding her father as its head.
Although she was an esteemed
Neo-Platonist intellectual and the
rst notable female mathematician,
it was her martyrdom that ensured
her fame. She was murdered by a
Christian mob, who blamed her for
the religious turmoil resulting from
conict between her friend, the
Roman prefect Orestos, and Cyril,
Bishop of Alexandria. No works of
hers survive, but she is credited
with inventing a graduated brass
hydrometer and the plane astrolabe.
See also: Plato 5055 Plotinus 331

c.490430 BCE

c.205270 CE





c.245325 CE



PYRRHO

c.360272 BCE
Pyrrho was born on the Ionian
island of Elis. He was exposed to
Asian culture while serving on
Alexander the Greats military
campaigns, and was also the rst
noted philosopher to place doubt
at the center of to his thinking.
Pyrrho treated the suspension of
judgment about beliefs as the only
reasonable reaction to the fallibility
of the senses, and to the fact that
both sides of any argument can
seem to be equally valid. Pyrrho left
no writings, but he did inspire the
Skeptical school in ancient Greek
philosophy, which developed the
idea that the suspension of belief
leads to a tranquil mind.
See also: Socrates 4649
Al-Ghazl 332


226249 CE





c.370415 CE







332 DIRECTORY
PROCLUS

AL-KINDI

AL-FARABI

Born in Constantinople, Proclus
succeeded his Platonist teacher
Syrianus as head of the Academy
at Athens. His Commentary on
Euclid is the main account of
the early development of Greek
geometry, and his Commentary on
Platos Timaeus has been described
as the most important ancient
Neo-Platonist text. A scientist,
mathematician, lawyer, and
poet, with a deep interest in
religion, he was to become an
inuence on many thinkers in
both the medieval Islamic and the
Christian schools of philosophy.
See also: Plato 5055 Boethius
7475 Thomas Aquinas 8895

The Iraqi polymath Al-Kind was
one of the rst Islamic scholars to
introduce ancient Greek ideas to
the Islamic world. He worked at
Baghdads House of Wisdom, where
he supervised the translation of the
great Classical texts into Arabic.
He wrote extensively on a variety of
subjects, most notably psychology
and cosmology, mixing his own
Neo-Platonist approach with the
authority of Aristotelian argument.
He had a special interest in the
compatibility of philosophy and
Islamic theology, and many of his
works are concerned with the
nature of God and the human soul,
as well as prophetic knowledge.
See also: Al-Frb 332
Avicenna 7679 Averroes 8283

It is disputed whether Al-Frb
was born in what is now Iran or in
Kazakhstan, but it is certain that
he arrived in Baghdad in 901,
where he spent much of his life.
Although a Neo-Platonist, he was
also highly inuenced by Aristotle
and wrote commentaries on his
work, as well as on other subjects,
including medicine, science, and
music. He regarded philosophy as
a calling conferred by Allah and as
the only route to true knowledge.
In this life, he said, philosophers
have a duty to guide people in all
matters of daily life; his book The
Ideas of the Citizens of the Virtuous
City describes a Platonic utopia
ruled by philosopher prophets.
See also: Aristotle 5663
Avicenna 7679 Averroes 8283

c.412485 CE

801-873 CE





c.872950 CE





JOHN PHILOPONUS





490570 CE

Almost nothing is known about
Philoponuss early life other than
he studied in Alexandria with the
Aristotelian Ammonius Hermiae.
A philosopher and natural scientist,
Philoponuss methods of enquiry
were shaped by Christian beliefs.
By arguing that the universe had an
absolute beginning, and that this
beginning was caused by God, he
became the rst serious critic of
Aristotle, opening up paths of
enquiry which became major
inuences on future scientists,
notably the Italian astronomer
Galileo Galilei. Unpopular with
his colleagues, he later gave up
philosophy and turned to theology,
again causing controversy by
suggesting that the Trinity was
not one but three separate Gods.
See also: Aristotle 5663
Thomas Aquinas 8895


JOHANNES SCOTUS
ERIUGENA

AL-GHAZALI

His Latin name is often translated
as John the Scot, but the theologian
and philosopher Johannes Scotus
Eriugena was Irishthe medieval
Latin for Ireland being Scotia. He
argued that there was no conict
between knowledge that was
derived from reason and knowledge
from divine revelation. He even set
out to demonstrate that all Christian
doctrine had in fact a rational basis.
This brought him into conict with
the Church, on the grounds that his
theories made both revelation and
faith redundant. Eruigenas defense
was that reason is the judge of all
authority, and that it is needed for
us to interpret revelation.
See also: Plato 5055
St. Augustine of Hippo 7273

Born what is now Iran, Al-Ghazl
was head of the prestigious
Nizamiyyah school in Baghdad
from 1092 to 1096, when he wrote
The Opinions of the Philosophers,
which explains the Neo-Platonist
and Aristotelian views of Islamic
scholars. His lectures brought him
great respect and wealth, but after
concluding that truth comes from
faith and mystical practices, and not
from philosophy, he abandoned his
teaching post and possessions to
become a wandering Su preacher.
He came to believe that all causal
links between events were only
made possible by the will of God.
See also: Aristotle 5663
Avicenna 7679 Averroes 8283
Moses Maimonides 8485

c.815877CE



c.10581111







DIRECTORY 333
PIERRE ABELARD

IBN BAJJA

MEISTER ECKHART

Remembered less for his philosophy
than for his tragic love affair with
his pupil Hlose, Pierre Ablard
was nevertheless a remarkable
thinker. A brilliant student, he
attended the Cathedral School of
Ntre Dame, Paris, and became a
charismatic teacher. By the age of
22, he had set up his own school,
and went on to become head at
Ntre Dame in 1115. Renowned for
his skills in argument, Ablard
stood against the popular belief in
universal forms, inherited from
Plato, stating that terms such as
oak tree, are just words that do
not denote anything real about the
many particular oaks that exist.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Boethius 7475 William
of Ockham 334

A political advisor, poet, scientist,
and philosopher, Ibn Bjja was one
of the great thinkers of Moorish
Spain. Born in Saragossa, he used
the ideas of Plato and Aristotle
in his treatises, and inuenced
Averroes. He set out to show the
compatibility between reason
and faith, stating that the path
to true knowledge, and therefore
enlightenment and a link with the
divine, came only from thinking
and acting rationally. But, Ibn Bjja
warned, each individual must make
their own journey to enlightenment.
If the enlightened attempt to pass
their wisdom directly to others,
they place themselves at risk of
contamination by the ignorant.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Averroes 8283

Little is known about the early life
of the German theologian Meister
Eckhart, other than he studied in
Paris, joined the Dominican order,
and held various administrative
and teaching posts around Europe.
A follower of Thomas Aquinas, he
is best known for his vivid sermons,
which dwelt on the presence of God
within the human soul, and for the
mystical imagery of his prose. He
was accused of heresy, and during
his trial he acknowledged that the
orid and emotive language he
used to inspire his listeners might
have led him to stray from the path
of orthodoxy. It is thought that he
died before a verdict was delivered.
See also: St. Anselm 8081
Thomas Aquinas 8895 Ramon
Llull 333 Nikolaus von Kues 96

ROBERT GROSSETESTE

RAMON LLULL

JOHN DUNS SCOTUS

The child of a poor English peasant
family, Grossetestes formidable
intelligence was spotted by the
Mayor of Lincoln, who arranged
for him to be educated. Evidence
indicates that he studied at Oxford
University and in Paris, before
joining the clergy and going on
to become Bishop of Lincoln. An
outspoken critic of the Church
in his time, Grosseteste is noted
for his scientic thinking. He
was one of the rst medieval
philosophers to grasp Aristotles
dual path of scientic reasoning:
generalizing from particular
observations into a universal law,
and then back again from universal
laws to the prediction of particulars.
See also: Aristotle 5663

Educated at the Majorcan royal
court in Mallorca, Llull developed a
mystical version of Neo-Platonism.
After a vision of Christ, he joined
the Franciscan order and worked
as a missionary in North Africa.
Convinced that rational argument
could persuade Muslims and Jews
to convert to Christianity, Llull
wrote Ars Magna. In this work, he
used complex reasoning to generate
different combinations of the basic
tenets of all monotheistic religions,
hoping to demonstrate the truths of
Christianity. He was convinced
that if everybody was of one faith,
all human knowledge would
combine into a single system.
See also: Plato 5055 St. Anselm
8081 Meister Eckhart 333

Duns Scotus, a Franciscan friar,
was among the most inuential of
the medieval philosophers. Born
in Scotland, he taught at Oxford
University and later in Paris. Duns
Scotuss arguments were noted for
their rigor and intricacy. He argued
against Thomas Aquinas that
attributes, when applied to God,
retain the same meaning as when
used of ordinary objects. On the
issue of universals, he stated that
we can perceive particulars
directly, without the assistance of
general concepts. He also claimed
that knowledge can be acquired by
the proper use of the senses, without
the need for divine illumination.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Thomas Aquinas 8895

10791142

c.10951138







11751253

c.12601327





12321316



c.12661308













334 DIRECTORY
WILLIAM OF OCKHAM

MOSES OF NARBONNE

The English theologian and
philosopher William of Ockham
studied and taught at Oxford. He
was a Franciscan friar, and was
excommunicated for claiming
that the pope had no authority to
exercise temporal power. He is best
known to students of philosophy for
the principle that bears his name:
Ockhams Razor, which states that
the best possible explanation of
anything is always the simplest.
In his support for the idea that
universals are abstractions from
experience of particulars, he is
regarded as a forerunner of British
empiricism, a movement begun in
the 17th century by John Locke.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Francis Bacon 11011
John Locke 13033

Moses of Narbonne, also known
as Moses ben Joshua, was a Jewish
philosopher and physician. Born in
Perpignan, in the Catalan region of
France, he later moved to Spain. He
believed that Judaism was a guide
to the highest degree of truth. He
also stated that the Torah (the rst
part of the Hebrew Bible and the
basis of Jewish law) has two levels
of meaning: the literal and the
metaphysical. The latter is not
accessible to the layman.
See also: Averroes 8283 Moses
Maimonides 8485

c.12851347

DIED







NICOLAUS OF AUTRECOURT
c.12981369

Born near Verdun, France, Nicolaus
of Autrecourt studied theology at
the Sorbonne in Paris. Unusually for
a philosopher of the medieval
period, he explored the logic of
skepticism, concluding that truth
and the truth of its contradiction
are not logically compatible, so that
absolute truth or knowledge, and
the causal links between events or
reactions, cannot be uncovered by
logic alone. In 1346, Pope Clement
VI condemned his ideas as heretical.
He was ordered to recant his
statements and his books were
burnt in public. With the exception
of his Universal Treatise and a few
letters, little of his work survives.
See also: Pyrrho 331 Al-Ghazl
332 David Hume 14853




c.1362



GIOVANNI PICO
DELLA MIRANDOLA
14631494

Pico della Mirandola was a member
of the Platonic Academy in Florence
and is best known for his Oration on
the Dignity of Man, which argued
that the potential of the individual
was limitless, the only restrictions
being self-imposed. It was written
as an introduction to 900 Theses,
his compendium of intellectual
achievement, in which he aimed to
reconcile Platonic and Aristotelian
thinking. Papal objections to the
inclusion of the merits of paganism
saw Mirandola briey jailed, after
which he was forced to ee France.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Desiderius Erasmus 97




FRANCISCO DE VITORIA
14801546

A Dominican friar, Francisco de
Vitoria was a follower of Thomas
Aquinas and founder of the School

of Salamanca. Called the father of
international law, he is primarily
known for developing a code for
international relations. He grew up
at the time of Spains unication
and its colonization of the Americas.
Although he did not argue against
Spains right to build an empire, he
thought that Christianity should
not be imposed on the indigenous
peoples of South America and that
they should be afforded rights to
property and self-government.
See also: Thomas Aquinas 8895

GIORDANO BRUNO
15481600

The Italian astronomer and thinker
Giordano Bruno was inuenced by
Nikolaus von Kues and the Corpus
Hermeticuma set of occult
treatises believed, at the time, to
predate ancient Greek philosophy.
From von Kues, he took the idea of
an innite universe, in which our
solar system is just one of many
supporting intelligent life. God,
argued Bruno, is a part of, not
separate from, a universe made
up of monads, or animate atoms.
These views, and his interest in
astrology and magic, led to him
being found guilty of heresy and
burned at the stake.
See also: Nikolaus von Kues 96
Gottfried Leibniz 13435


FRANCISCO SUAREZ
15481617

Born in Granada, Spain, the Jesuit
philosopher Francisco Surez wrote
on many topics, but is best known
for his writings on metaphysics. In
the controversy over universal
forms that dominated so much
philosophy of the time, he argued

DIRECTORY 335
that only particulars exist. Surez
also maintained that between
Thomas Aquinass two types of
divine knowledgethe knowledge
of what is actual and the knowledge
of what is possiblethere exists
middle knowledge of what would
have been the case had things
been different. He believed that
God has middle knowledge of all
our actions, without this meaning
that God caused them to happen
or that they are unavoidable.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 Thomas Aquinas 8895

in a thesis he published in 1745,
stating that emotions are the result
of physical changes in the body,
caused outrage, forcing him to ee
from France to Holland. In 1747 he
published Man a Machine, in which
he expanded his materialist ideas
and rejected Descartes theory that
the mind and body are separate.
The books reception caused him
to ee again, this time to Berlin.
See also: Thomas Hobbes 11215
Ren Descartes 11623






BERNARD MANDEVILLE
c.16701733

Bernard Mandeville was a Dutch
philosopher, satirist, and physician,
who made his home in London. His
best-known work, The Fable of
Bees (1729) concerns a hive of
industrious bees which, when
suddenly made virtuous, stop
working and go and live quietly in
a nearby tree. Its central argument
is that the only way any society can
progress is through vice, and that
virtues are lies employed by the
ruling elite to subdue the lower
classes. Economic growth, stated
Mandeville, stems only from the
individuals ability to satisfy his
greed. His ideas are often seen as
the forerunners to the theories of
Adam Smith in the 18th century.
See also: Adam Smith 16063

JULIEN OFFRAY DE LA
METTRIE
1709-1751

Julien Offray de la Mettrie was born
in Brittany. He studied medicine
and served as an army physician.
The atheist sentiments expressed

ee. He became a passionate
counter-revolutionary. Mankind
was inherently weak and sinful,
he declared, and the dual powers of
monarch and God were essential to
social order. In On the Pope (1819),
De Maistre argues that government
should be in the hands of a single
authority gure, ideally linked to
religion, such as the pope.
See also: Edmund Burke 17273

FRIEDRICH SCHELLING
17751854

NICOLAS DE CONDORCET
17431794

Nicolas, Marquis de Condorcet, was
an early exponent of the French
tradition of approaching moral and
political issues from a mathematical
perspective. His famous formula,
known as Condorcets Paradox,
drew attention to a paradox in the
voting system by showing that
majority preferences become
intransitive when there are more
than three candidates. A liberal
thinker, he advocated equal rights
and free education for all, including
women. He played a key role in the
French Revolution, but was branded
a traitor for opposing the execution
of Louis XVI, and died in prison.
See also: Ren Descartes 116-23
Voltaire 14647 Jean-Jacques
Rousseau 15459




Friedrich Schelling started out as
a theologian but, inspired by the
ideas of Immanuel Kant, he turned
to philosophy. Born in southern
Germany, he studied with Georg
Hegel at Tbingen and taught at the
universities of Jena, Munich, and
Berlin. Schelling coined the term
absolute idealism for his view of
nature as an ongoing, evolutionary
process driven by Geist, or spirit.
He argued that all of nature, both
mind and matter, is involved in one
continuous organic process, and
that purely mechanistic accounts
of reality are inadequate. Human
consciousness is nature become
conscious, so that in the form of
man, nature has arrived at a state
of self-awareness.
See also: Benedictus Spinoza
12629 Immanuel Kant 16471
Johann Gottlieb Fichte 176 Georg
Hegel 17885






JOSEPH DE MAISTRE
17531821

Born in the French region of Savoy,
which was then part of the Kingdom
of Sardinia, Joseph de Maistre was
a lawyer and political philosopher.
He was a ruling senator when the
French revolutionary army invaded
Savoy in 1792, and was forced to

AUGUSTE COMTE
17981857

The French thinker Auguste Comte
is noted for his theory of intellectual
and social evolution, which divides
human progress into three key
stages. The earliest stage, the

336 DIRECTORY
theological stage, represented by
the medieval period in Europe,
is characterized by belief in the
supernatural. This gave way to
the metaphysical stage, in which
speculation on the nature of reality
developed. Finally, there came the
positivist agewhich Comte
saw as emerging at the time he
was writingwith a genuinely
scientic attitude, based solely on
observable regularities. Comte
believed this positivism would
help to create a new social order,
to redress the chaos generated by
the French Revolution.
See also: John Stuart Mill 19093
Karl Marx 196203

key work Methods of Ethics (1874),
he explored the problems of free will
by examining intuitive principles of
conduct. The pursuit of pleasure, he
claimed, does not exclude altruism,
or the providing of pleasure for
others, since providing pleasure for
others is itself a pleasure. A liberal
philanthropist and a champion of
womens rights to education,
Sidgwick was instrumental in
setting up Newnham, Cambridges
rst college for female students.
See also: Jeremy Bentham 174
John Stuart Mill 19093




FRANZ BRENTANO
18381917

RALPH WALDO EMERSON
18031882

Born in Boston, the American poet
Ralph Waldo Emerson was also a
noted philosopher. Inspired by the
Romantic movement, he believed
in the unity of nature, with every
single particle of matter and each
individual mind being a microcosm
of the entire universe. Emerson
was famous for his public lectures,
which urged the rejection of social
conformity and traditional authority.
Emerson advocated personal
integrity and self-reliance as the
only moral imperatives, stressing
that every human being has the
power to shape his own destiny.
See also: Henry David Thoreau
204 William James 20609
Friedrich Nietzsche 21421


(1879), meaning conceptual
notation, and The Foundations
of Arithmetic (1884) effected a
revolution in philosophical logic,
allowing the discipline to develop
rapidly. In On Sense and Reference
(1892) he showed that sentences
are meaningful for two reasons
for having a thing that they refer
to, and a unique way in which
that reference is made.
See also: Bertrand Russell 23639
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651
Rudolf Carnap 257

ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD
18611947

Born in Prussia, the philosopher
Franz Brentano is best known for
establishing psychology as a
discipline in its own right. Initially
a priest, he was unable to reconcile
himself with the concept of papal
infallibility, and left the Church in
1873. Brentano believed that mental
processes were not passive, but
should be seen as intentional acts.
His most highly regarded work is
Psychology from an Empirical
Standpoint. Its publication in
1874 led to him being offered a
professorship at the University
of Vienna, where he taught and
inspired a host of illustrious
students, including the founder of
psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud.
See also: Edmund Husserl 22425

An English mathematician, Alfred
North Whitehead had a signicant
inuence on ethics, metaphysics,
and the philosophy of science. With
his ex-pupil Bertrand Russell, he
wrote the landmark study on
mathematical logic, Principia
Mathematica (191013). In 1924, at
the age of 63, he accepted a chair
in philosophy at Harvard. There he
developed what became known as
process philosophy. This was based
on his conviction that traditional
philosophical categories were
inadequate in dealing with the
interactions between matter, space,
and time, and that the living organ
or experience is the living body as
a whole and not just the brain.
See also: Bertrand Russell 23639
Willard Van Orman Quine 27879

GOTTLOB FREGE

NISHIDA KITARO

A professor of mathematics at Jena
University, the German philosopher
Gottlob Frege was a pioneer of the
the analytic tradition in philosophy.
His rst major work Begriffsschrift

Japanese philosopher Nishida
Kitaro studied Daoism and
Confucianism at school and
Western philosophy at Tokyo
University. He went on to teach





HENRY SIDGWICK
18381900

The English moral philosopher
Henry Sidgwick was a fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge. In his





18481925

18701945

DIRECTORY 337
at Kyoto University, where he
established Western philosophy as
an object of serious study in Japan.
Key to his thinking is the logic
of place, designed to overcome
traditional Western oppositions
between subject and object through
the pure experience of Zen
Buddhism, in which distinctions
between knower and thing known,
self and world, are lost.
See also: Laozi 2425 Siddharta
Gautama 3033 Confucius
3439 Hajime Tanabe 24445

symbolism of dreams and the
phenomenology of imagination. He
contested Auguste Comtes view
that scientic advancement was
continuous, claiming instead that
science often moves through shifts
in historical perspective allowing
fresh interpretations of old concepts.
See also: Auguste Comte 335
Thomas Kuhn 293 Michel
Foucault 30203



1874-1945

Born in Bresslau, in what is now
Poland, the German philosopher
Ernst Cassirer lectured at Berlin
University and then at Hamburg,
where he had access to the vast
collection of studies on tribal
cultures and myths in the Warburg
Library. These were to inform his
major work The Philosophy of
Symbolic Forms (192329), in which
he incorporated mythical thinking
into a philosophical system similar
to Immanuel Kants. In 1933, Cassirer
ed Europe to escape the rise of
Nazism, continuing his work in
America, and later Sweden.
See also: Immanuel Kant 16471
Martin Heidegger 25255

ERNST BLOCH
A German Marxist philosopher,
Ernst Blochs work focuses on the
possibility of a humanistic utopian
world, free of exploitation and
oppression. During World War I
he took refuge from the conict in
Switzerland, and in 1933 ed the
Nazis, ending up in the United
States. Here he began his key
work, The Principle of Hope (1947).
After World War II, Bloch taught in
Leipzigbut with the building of
the Berlin Wall in 1961, he sought
asylum in West Germany. Although
he was an atheist, Bloch believed
that religions mystical vision of
heaven on earth is attainable.
See also: Georg Hegel 17885
Karl Marx 196203




GASTON BACHELARD
18841962

The French philosopher Gaston
Bachelard studied physics before
switching to philosophy. He taught
at Dijon University, going on to
become the rst professor of history
and philosophy of the sciences at
the Sorbonne in Paris. His study of
thought processes encompasses the

MICHAEL OAKESHOTT
19011990

c.18851977

ERNST CASSIRER













Ryle stated, are the cause of much
philosophical confusion, so careful
attention to the underlying function
of ordinary language is the way to
overcome philosophical problems.
See also: Thomas Hobbes 11215
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24651
Daniel Dennett 339

GILBERT RYLE
19001976

Born in Brighton on the south coast
of England, Gilbert Ryle studied
and taught at Oxford University. He
believed that many problems in
philosophy arise from the abuse of
language. He showed that we often
assume expressions that function
in a similar way grammatically are
members of the same logical
category. Such category mistakes,

Michael Oakeshott was a British
political theorist and philosopher.
He taught at Cambridge and Oxford
universities, before becoming
Professor of Political Science at the
London School of Economics. Works
such as On Being Conservative
(1956) and Rationalism in Politics and
Other Essays (1962) cemented his
fame as a political theorist. He
had an important inuence on
Conservative party politics in the
late 20th century. However, since
he frequently revised his opinions,
his work dees categorization.
See also: Edmund Burke 17273
Georg Hegel 17885


AYN RAND
19051982

The writer and philosopher Ayn
Rand was born in Russia, but
moved to the United States in 1926.
She was working as a screenwriter
when her novel The Fountainhead
(1943), the story of an ideal man,
made her famous. She is the
founder of Objectivism, which
challenges the idea that mans
moral duty is to live for others.
Reality exists as an objective
absolute and mans reasoning is
his manner of perceiving it.
See also: Aristotle 5663
Adam Smith 16063


338 DIRECTORY
JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN

LOUIS ALTHUSSER

RENE GIRARD

Educated at Oxford University,
where he also taught, the British
philosopher John Langshaw Austin
was a leading gure in ordinary
language or Oxford philosophy,
which became fashionable in the
1950s. Austin argued that rigorous
analysis of how language operates
in ordinary everyday usage can
lead to the discovery of the subtle
linguistic distinctions needed to
resolve profound philosophical
problems. He is best known from
his papers and lectures that were
published after his death as How
to do Things with Words (1962) and
Sense and Sensibilia (1964).
See also: Bertrand Russell
23639 Gilbert Ryle 337

Born in Algeria, the French Marxist
scholar Louis Althusser argued
that there is a radical difference
between Marxs early writings and
the scientic period of Capital
(Das Kapital). The early works of
Marx reect the times with their
focus on Hegelian concepts such as
alienation, whereas in the mature
work, history is seen as having its
own momentum, independent of
the intentions and actions of human
agents. Therefore Althussers claim
that we are determined by the
structural conditions of society
involves the controversial rejection
of human autonomy, denying
individual agency a role in history.
See also: Georg Hegel 17885
Karl Marx 196203 Michel
Foucault 30203 Slavoj iek 326

The French philosopher and
historian Ren Girard writes and
teaches across a wide range of
subjects, from economics to literary
criticism. He is best known for his
theory of mimetic desire. In Deceit,
Desire and the Novel (1961), Girard
uses ancient mythology and modern
ction to show that human desire,
as distinct from animal appetite, is
always aroused by the desire of
another. His study of the origins of
violence, Violence and the Sacred
(1972), goes further by arguing
that this imitated desire leads to
conict and violence. Religion,
Girard states, originated with the
process of victimization or sacrice
that was used to quell the violence.
See also: Michel Foucault 30203

19111960



19181990

1923





DONALD DAVIDSON
19172003

The American philosopher Donald
Davidson studied at Harvard and
went on to a distinguished career
teaching at various American
universities. He was involved in
several areas of philosophy, notably
the philosophy of mind. He held a
materialist position, stating that
each token mental event was also
a physical event, although he did
not believe that the mental could be
entirely reduced to, or explained in
terms of, the physical. Davidson
also made notable contributions to
the philosophy of language, arguing
that a language must have a nite
number of elements and that its
meaning is a product of these
elements and rules of combination.
See also: Ludwig Wittgenstein
24651 Willard Van Orman
Quine 27879




GILLES DELEUZE

EDGAR MORIN

19251995

1921

The French philosopher Edgar
Morin was born in Paris, the son of
Jewish immigrants from Greece.
His positive view of the progress of
Western civilization is tempered by
what he perceives as the negative
effects of technical and scientic
advances. Progress may create
wealth but also seems to bring with
it a breakdown of responsibility and
global awareness. Morin developed
what became known as complex
thought and coined the term
politics of civilization. His sixvolume Method (19772004) is a
compendium of his thoughts and
ideas, offering a broad insight into
the nature of human enquiry.
See also: Theodor Adorno 26667
Jrgen Habermas 30607


Gilles Deleuze was born in Paris
and spent most of his life there.
He saw philosophy as a creative
process for constructing concepts,
rather than an attempt to discover
and reect reality. Much of his work
was in the history of philosophy,
yet his readings did not attempt to
disclose the true Nietzsche, for
example. Instead they rework the
conceptual mechanisms of a
philosophers subject to produce
new ideas, opening up new avenues
of thought. Deleuze is also known for
collaborations with psychoanalyst
Flix GuattariAnti-Oedipus (1972)
and What is Philosophy (1991)and
for his commentaries on literature,
lm, and art.
See also: Henri Bergson 22627
Michel Foucault 30203


DIRECTORY 339
NIKLAS LUHMANN

DANIEL DENNETT

MARTHA NUSSBAUM

Born in Lneburg, Germany, Niklas
Luhmann was captured by the
Americans during World War II,
when he was just 17. After the war
he worked as a lawyer until, in
1962, he took a sabbatical to study
sociology in America. He went
on to become one of the most
important and prolic social
theorists of the 20th century.
Luhmann developed a grand
theory, to explain every element
of social life, from complex wellestablished societies to the briefest
of exchanges, lasting just seconds.
In his most important work, The
Society of Society (1997), he argues
that communication is the only
genuinely social phenomenon.
See also: Jrgen Habermas 306-07

Born in Beirut, the American
philosopher Daniel Dennett is an
acclaimed expert on the nature of
cognitive systems. Professor of
Philosophy at Tufts University,
Massachusetts, he is noted for
his wide-ranging expertise in
linguistics, articial intelligence,
neuroscience, and psychology.
Using memorable and creative
labels, such as Joycean machine
for stream of consciousness, he
argues that the source of free will
and consciousness is the brains
computational circuitry, which
tricks us into thinking we are more
intelligent than we actually are.
See also: Gilbert Ryle 337
Willard Van Orman Quine 27879
Michel Foucault 30203

Born in New York City, American
philosopher Martha Nussbaum is
the Ernst Freund Distinguished
Service Professor of Law and Ethics
at the University of Chicago. She
has published numerous books
and papers, mainly on ethics and
political philosophy, where the rigor
of her academic enquiry is always
informed by a passionate
liberalism. Her exploration of
ancient Greek ethics, The Fragility
of Goodness (1986), rst brought
her acclaim, but she is now equally
well-known for her liberal views on
feminism, as expressed in Sex and
Social Justice (1999), which argues
for radical change in gender and
family relationships.
See also: Plato 5055 Aristotle
5663 John Rawls 29495

19271998

1942

1947









MICHEL SERRES

MARCEL GAUCHET
1946

ISABELLE STENGERS

The French author and philosopher
Michel Serres studied mathematics
before taking up philosophy. He is
a professor at Stanford University
in California and a member of the
prestigious Acadmie Franaise.
His lectures and books are
presented in French, with an
elegance and uidity that is hard
to translate. His post-humanist
enquiries take the form of maps,
where the journeys themselves
play an major role. He has been
described as a thinker for whom
voyaging is invention, nding
truths in the chaos, discord, and
disorder revealed in the links
between the sciences, arts, and
contemporary culture.
See also: Roland Barthes 29091
Jacques Derrida 30813

The French philosopher, historian,
and sociologist Marcel Gauchet
has written widely on democracy
and the role of religion in the
modern world. He is the editor of
the intellectual French periodical
Le Dbat and a professor at the
cole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales (EHESS) in Paris.
His key work, The Disenchantment
of the World: A Political History of
Religion (1985), explores the modern
cult of individualism in the context
of mans religious past. As religious
belief declines across the Western
world, Gauchet argues that elements
of the sacred has been incorporated
into human relationships and other
social activities.
See also: Maurice Merleau-Ponty
27475 Michel Foucault 30203

Isabelle Stengers was born in
Belgium and studied chemistry
at the Free University of Brussels,
where she is now Professor of
Philosophy. She was awarded the
grand prize for philosophy by the
Acadmie Franaise in 1993. A
distinguished thinker on science,
Stengers has written extensively
about modern scientic processes,
with a focus on the use of science
for social ends and its relationship
to power and authority. Her books
include Power and Invention (1997)
and The Invention of Modern
Science (2000), and Order Out of
Chaos (1984) with the Nobel Prizewinning chemist Ilya Prigogine.
See also: A lfred North Whitehead
336 Edgar Morin 338

1930





1949



340

GLOSSARY
the Absolute Ultimate reality
conceived of as an all-embracing,
single principle. Some thinkers
have identied this principle with
God; others have believed in the
Absolute but not in God; others
have not believed in either. The
philosopher most closely associated
with the idea is Georg Hegel.
Aesthetics A branch of philosophy
concerned with the principles of art
and the notion of beauty.
Agent The doing self, as distinct
from the knowing self; the self that
decides or chooses or acts.
Analysis The search for a deeper
understanding of something by
taking it to pieces and looking at
each part. The opposite approach
is synthesis.
Analytic philosophy A view of
philosophy that sees its aim as
claricationthe clarication of
concepts, statements, methods,
arguments, and theories by
carefully taking them apart.
Analytic statement A statement
whose truth or falsehood can be
established by analysis of the
statement itself. The opposite is
a synthetic statement.
Anthropomorphism The
attribution of human characteristics
to something that is not human; for
instance to God or to the weather.

A posteriori Something that can
be considered valid only by means
of experience.

A priori Something known to be
valid in advance of (or without
need of) experience.
Argument A process of reasoning
in logic that purports to show its
conclusion to be true.
Category The broadest class or
group into which things can be
divided. Aristotle and Immanuel
Kant both tried to provide a
complete list of categories.
Concept A thought or idea; the
meaning of a word or term.
Contingent May or may not be the
case; things could be either way.
The opposite is necessary.
Contradictory Two statements
are contradictory if one must be
true and the other false: they
cannot both be true, nor can they
both be false.
Contrary Two statements are
contrary if they cannot both be
true but may both be false.
Corroboration Evidence that
lends support to a conclusion
without necessarily proving it.
Cosmology The study of the whole
universe, the cosmos.
Deduction Reasoning from the
general to the particularfor
instance, If all men are mortal then
Socrates, being a man, must be
mortal. It is universally agreed that
deduction is valid. The opposite
process is called induction.

Determinism The view that
nothing can happen other than
what does happen, because every
event is the necessary outcome
of causes preceding itwhich
themselves were the necessary
outcome of causes preceding them.
The opposite is indeterminism.
Dialectic i) Skill in questioning or
argument. ii) The idea that any
assertion, whether in word or deed,
evokes opposition, the two of which
are reconciled in a synthesis that
includes elements of both.
Dualism A view of something as
made up of two irreducible parts,
such as the idea of human beings
as consisting of bodies and minds,
the two being radically unlike.
Emotive Expressing emotion. In
philosophy the term is often used
in a derogatory way for utterances
that pretend to be objective or
impartial while in fact expressing
emotional attitudes, as for example
in emotive denition.
Empirical knowledge Knowledge
of the empirical world.
Empirical statement A statement
about the empirical world; what is
or could be experienced.
Empirical world The world as
revealed to us by our actual or
possible experience.
Empiricism The view that all
knowledge of anything that
actually exists must be derived
from experience.

GLOSSARY 341
Epistemology The branch of
philosophy concerned with what
sort of thing, if anything, we can
know; how we know it; and what
knowledge is. In practice it is the
dominant branch of philosophy.

Hypothesis A theory whose truth
is assumed for the time being
because it forms a useful starting
point for further investigation,
despite limited evidence to prove
its validity.

Essence The essence of a thing is
that which is distinctive about it
and makes it what it is. For instance,
the essence of a unicorn is that it is
a horse with a single horn on its
head. Unicorns do not exist of
courseso essence does not imply
existence. This distinction is
important in philosophy.

Idealism The view that reality
consists ultimately of something
nonmaterial, whether it be mind,
the contents of mind, spirits, or
one spirit. The opposite point of
view is materialism.

Ethics A branch of philosophy
that is concerned with questions
about how we should live, and
therefore about the nature of right
and wrong, good and bad, ought
and ought not, duty, and other
such concepts.
Existentialism A philosophy
that begins with the contingent
existence of the individual human
being and regards that as the
primary enigma. It is from this
starting point that philosophical
understanding is pursued.
Fallacy A seriously wrong
argument, or a false conclusion
based on such an argument.
Falsiability A statement, or set
of statements, is falsiable if it
can be proved wrong by empirical
testing. According to Karl Popper,
falsiability is what distinguishes
science from nonscience.
Humanism A philosophical
approach based on the assumption
that mankind is the most important
thing that exists, and that there can
be no knowledge of a supernatural
world, if any such world exists.

Indeterminism The view that not
all events are necessary outcomes
of events that may have preceeded
them. The opposite is point of view
is determinism.
Induction Reasoning from the
particular to the general. An
example would be Socrates died,
Plato died, Aristotle died, and each
other individual man who was born
more than 130 years ago has died.
Therefore all men are mortal.
Induction does not necessarily yield
results that are true, so whether it
is genuinely a logical process is
disputed. The opposite process is
called deduction.
Intuition Direct knowing, whether
by sensory perception or by insight;
a form of knowledge that makes no
use of reasoning.
Irreducible An irreducible thing
is one that cannot be brought to a
simpler or reduced form.
Linguistic philosophy Also
known as linguistic analysis. The
view that philosophical problems
arise from a muddled use of
language, and are to be solved, or
dissolved, by a careful analysis
of the language in which they
have been expressed.

Logic The branch of philosophy
that makes a study of rational
argument itselfits terms,
concepts, rules, and methods.
Logical positivism The view that
the only empirical statements
that are meaningful are those that
are veriable.
Materialism The doctrine that
all real existence is ultimately of
something material. The opposite
point of view is idealism.
Metaphilosophy The branch of
philosophy that looks at the nature
and methods of philosophy itself.
Metaphysics The branch of
philosophy concerned with the
ultimate nature of what exists. It
questions the natural world from
outside, and its questions cannot
be answered by science.
Methodology The study of methods
of enquiry and argument.
Monism A view of something as
formed by a single element; for
example, the view that human
beings do not consist of elements
that are ultimately separable, like
a body and a soul, but are of one
single substance.
Mysticism Intuitive knowledge
that transcends the natural world.
Naturalism The view that reality
is explicable without reference to
anything outside the natural world.
Necessary Must be the case. The
opposite is contingent. Hume
believed that necessary connections
existed only in logic, not in the real
world, a view that has been upheld
by many philosophers since.

342 GLOSSARY
Necessary and sufcient
conditions For X to be a husband
it is a necessary condition for X to
be married. However, this is not a
sufcient conditionfor what if X
is female? A sufcient condition for
X to be a husband is that X is both
a man and married. One of the
commonest forms of error in
thinking is to mistake necessary
conditions for sufcient conditions.

Phenomenon An experience that
is immediately present. If I look at
an object, the object as experienced
by me is a phenomenon. Immanuel
Kant distinguished this from the
object as it is in itself, independently
of being experienced: this he called
the noumenon.

Noumenon The unknowable
reality behind what presents itself
to human consciousness, the latter
being known as phenomenon. A
thing as it is in itself, independently
of being experienced, is said to be
the noumenon. The noumenal has
therefore become a term for the
ultimate nature of reality.

Philosophy Literally, the love of
wisdom. The word is widely used
for any sustained rational reection
about general principles that has
the aim of achieving a deeper
understanding. Philosophy provides
training in the disciplined analysis
and clarication of arguments,
theories, methods, and utterances
of all kinds, and the concepts of
which they make use. Traditionally,
its ultimate aim has been to attain
a better understanding of the world,
though in the 20th century a good
deal of philosophy became devoted
to attaining a better understanding
of its own procedures.

Numinous Anything regarded as
mysterious and awesome, bearing
intimations from outside the natural
realm. Not to be confused with the
noumenal; see noumenon above.

Philosophy of religion The
branch of philosophy that looks at
human belief systems and the real
or imaginary objects, such as gods,
that form the basis for these beliefs.

Ontology A branch of philosophy
that asks what actually exists, as
distinct from the nature of our
knowledge of it, which is covered
by the branch of epistemology.
Ontology and epistemology taken
together constitute the central
tradition of philosophy.

Philosophy of science A branch
of philosophy concerned with the
nature of scientic knowledge and
the practice of scientic endeavor.

Noncontradictory Statements are
considered noncontradictory if their
truth-values are independent of
one another.

Phenomenology An approach
to philosophy which investigates
objects of experience (known as
phenomena) only to the extent
that they manifest themselves in
our consciousness, without making
any assumptions about their
nature as independent things.

Political philosophy The branch
of philosophy that questions the
nature and methods of the state
and deals with such subjects as
justice, law, social hierarchies,
political power, and constitutions.
Postmodernism A viewpoint that
holds a general distrust of theories,
narratives, and ideologies that
attempt to put all knowledge into
a single framework.

Pragmatism A theory of truth.
It holds that a statement is true if
it does all the jobs required of it:
accurately describes a situation;
prompts us to anticipate experience
correctly; ts in with already wellattested statements; and so on.
Premise The starting point of an
argument. Any argument has to
start from at least one premise, and
therefore does not prove its own
premises. A valid argument proves
that its conclusions follow from its
premisesbut this is not the same
as proving that its conclusions are
true, which is something no
argument can do.
Presupposition Something taken
for granted but not expressed. All
utterances have presuppositions,
and these may be conscious or
unconscious. If a presupposition is
mistaken, an utterance based on it
may also be mistaken, though the
mistake may not evident in the
utterance itself. The study of
philosophy teaches us to become
more aware of presuppositions.
Primary and secondary qualities
John Locke divided the properties
of a physical object into those
that are possessed by the object
independently of being experienced,
such as its location, dimensions,
velocity, mass, and so on (which he
called primary qualities), and those
that involve the interaction of an
experiencing observer, such as the
objects color and taste (which he
called secondary qualities).
Property In philosophy this
word is commonly used to mean a
characteristic; for example fur or
hair is a dening property of a
mammal. See also primary and
secondary qualities.

GLOSSARY 343
Rational Based on, or according
to, the principles of reason or logic.
Proposition The content of a
statement that conrms or denies
whether something is the case, and
is capable of being true or false.
Rationalism The view that we
can gain knowledge of the world
through the use of reason, without
relying on sense-perception, which
is regarded by rationalists as
unreliable. The opposite view
is known as empiricism.
Scepticism The view that it is
impossible for us to know anything
for certain.
Semantics The study of meanings
in linguistic expressions.
Semiotics The study of signs
and symbols, in particular their
relationships with the things they
are meant to signify.
Social contract An implicit
agreement among members of a
society to cooperate in order to
achieve goals that benet the whole
group, sometimes at the expense
of individuals within it.
Solipsism The view that only the
existence of the self can be known.
Sophist Someone whose aim in
argument is not to seek the truth
but to win the argument. In ancient
Greece, young men aspiring to
public life were taught by sophists
to learn the various methods of
winning arguments.
Synthesis Seeking a deeper
understanding of something by
putting the pieces together. The
opposite is analysis.

Synthetic statement A statement
that has to be set against facts
outside itself for its truth to be
determined. The opposite is an
analytic statement.

Universalism The belief that
we should apply to ourselves the
same standards and values that we
apply to others. Not to be confused
with universal, above.

Teleology A study of ends or
goals. A teleological explanation
is one that explains something in
terms of the ends that it serves.

Utilitarianism A theory of politics
and ethics that judges the morality
of actions by their consequences,
that regards the most desirable
consequence of any action as the
greatest good of the greatest
number, and that denes good
in terms of pleasure and the
absence of pain.

Theology Enquiry into scholarly
and intellectual questions
concerning the nature of God.
Philosophy, by contrast, does not
assume the existence of God,
though some philosophers have
attempted to prove his existence.
Thing-in-itself Another term for
a noumenon, from the German
Ding-an-sich.
Transcendental Outside the
world of sense experience.
Someone who believes that ethics
are transcendental believes that
ethics have their source outside the
empirical world. Thoroughgoing
empiricists do not believe that
anything transcendental exists,
and nor did Friedrich Nietzsche
or humanist existentialists.
Truth-value Either of two values,
namely true or false, that can be
applied to a statement.
Universal A concept of general
application, like red or woman.
It has been disputed whether
universals have an existence of
their own. Does redness exist, or
are there only individual red objects?
In the Middle Ages, philosophers
who believed that redness had a
real existence were called realists,
while philosophers who maintained
that it was no more than a word
were called nominalists.

Validity An argument is valid
if its conclusion follows from its
premises. This does not necessarily
mean that the conclusion is true: it
may be false if one of the premises
is false, though the argument itself
is still valid.
Veriability A statement or set
of statements can be veried if it
can be proved to be true by looking
at empirical evidence. Logical
positivists believed that the only
empirical statements that were
meaningful were those that were
veriable. David Hume and Karl
Popper pointed out that scientic
laws were unveriable.
World In philosophy the word
world has been given a special
sense, meaning the whole of
empirical reality, and may
therefore also be equated with
the totality of actual and possible
experience. True empiricists
believe that the world is all there is,
but philosophers with different
views believe that the world does
not account for total reality. Such
philosophers believe that there is a
transcendental realm as well as
an empirical realm, and they may
believe that both are equally real.

344

INDEX
Numbers in bold refer to main entries, those
in italics refer to the captions to illustrations.

95 Theses, Martin Luther 100
900 Thesis, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola 334

A
A History of Madness, Michel Foucault 303
A Lovers Discourse, Roland Barthes 290
A Theory of Justice, John Rawls 294, 295
A Treatise Concerning the Principles of
Human Knowledge, George Berkeley 101
A Treatise of Human Nature, David Hume
150, 153
Ablard, Pierre 95, 333
Adorno, Theodor 2667
Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic
Theory of Knowledge, Paul Feyerabend
297
Agathon 291
al-Frb 76, 332
al-Ghazl 78, 332
al-Kind 76, 332
Alcibiades 291
Althusser, Louis 288, 313, 338
American Power and the New Mandarins,
Noam Chomsky 304, 305
Amitabha, Buddha 245, 245
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, John Locke 101
Analects, Confucius 36, 37, 38
analytic philosophy 212, 340
Bertrand Russell 236
Gottlob Frege 336
Isaiah Berlin 28081
Karl Popper 262
Mary Midgley 292
Paul Feyerabend 297
Richard Wollheim 296
Willard Van Orman Quine 278
Anaxagoras 330
Anaximander 23, 330
Anaximenes of Miletus 23, 40, 330
Animal Liberation, Peter Singer 325
Anselm of Canterbury 8081
Anti-Oedipus, Ren Girard & Flix Guattari
338

Apology, Plato 47, 48, 52
Aquinas, Thomas 63, 71, 8895, 91, 97
Aristotle 79
Francisco de Vitoria 334
John Duns Scotus 333
John Locke 133
Meister Eckhart 333
Arendt, Hannah 255, 272
Aristocles see Plato
Aristotelianism 71, 76, 82, 83, 90
Aristotle 12, 21, 55, 5663, 59, 70, 71, 91, 94,
95, 274, 340
al-Frb 332
Averroes 82, 83
Avicenna 76, 77, 78, 79, 79
Benedictus Spinoza 126, 129
Boethius 75
Friedrich Schlegel 177
God and the future 74
human ourishing 235
Iamblichus 331
inductive argument 49
innite universe 9095
logic 14, 63, 75
mind and body 76, 77
observation 58, 59, 62
religion and philosophy 82, 83
Richard Rorty 316
Robert Grosseteste 333
Socrates 49
Thomas Aquinas 63, 9095
women 276
Arouet, Franois Marie see Voltaire
Ars Magna, Ramon Llull 333
arts 15, 16, 157, 157, 296
atheism 128, 189, 270
atomism 16, 45
Augustine, Aurelius see St. Augustine
Austin, John Langshaw 338
Averroes 62, 76, 823, 90, 91
Avicenna 62, 71, 769, 90

B
Bachelard, Gaston 337
Bacon, Francis 49, 100, 101, 11011, 113, 118
Barthes, Roland 29091
Beast and Man, Mary Midgley 292
Begriffsschrift, Gottlob Frege 336

Being and Nothingness, Jean-Paul Sartre 213
Being and Time, Martin Heidegger 213, 253,
255
Benjamin, Walter 258
Bentham, Jeremy 65, 144, 174, 191, 192, 325
Bergson, Henri 188, 2267
Berkeley, George 60, 63, 101, 130, 134,
13841, 150, 166
Berlin, Isaiah 203, 28081
Black Skin, White Masks, Frantz Fanon 288,
300, 301
Bloch, Ernst 337
body 13, 54, 77, 78, 79, 115, 122, 127, 128, 139,
275
Boethius, Anicius 70, 745, 83
Bonaparte, Napoleon 145, 184, 184
Boyle, Robert 110, 133, 140
Brahe, Tycho 111
Brahmanism 30, 33
Brentano, Franz 336
Bruno, Giordano 334
Buckle, H.T. 163
Buddha 20, 21, 30, 32, 233
Buddha Amitabha 245, 245
Buddhism 15, 20, 30, 33, 188, 245, 331
Burke, Edmund 1723

C
Camus, Albert 213, 221, 2845
Candide, Voltaire 144
Canon of Medicine, Avicenna 77, 78
Carnap, Rudolf 257
Cassirer, Ernst 337
Chomsky, Naom 133, 3045
Christianity 15, 70, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95
Aristotle 21, 63, 63, 71, 90
Avicenna 79
Blaise Pascal 124, 125
Francis Bacon 111
Friedrich Nietzsche 216, 219
Niccol Machiavelli 105, 106
Plato 72, 74, 96
Ramon Llull 333
St. Augustine of Hippo 73
Civil Disobedience, Henry David Thoreau 204
Cixous, Hlne 289, 322
Collection of Pythagorean Doctrines,
Iamblichus 331

INDEX 345
Commentary on Platos Timaeus, Proclus 332
Commentry on Euclid, Proclus 332
communism 198, 202, 203, 213, 288, 289
Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx 15, 145, 159
Comte, Auguste 335
Condorcets Paradox 335
Confessions, St. Augustine of Hippo 70
Confucianism 21, 36, 331
Confucius 20, 25, 30, 349
consciousness 17
Albert Camus 285
Daniel Dennett 339
David Chalmers 114
Georg Hegel 180, 181, 182, 184, 185
Immanuel Kant 166
Max Scheler 240
Miguel de Unamuno 233
conservatism 172, 173, 173
Copernicus, Nicolaus 100, 110, 293
Creative Evolution, Henri Bergson 227
Critique of Pure Reason, Immanuel Kant 144,
168, 171
Cynics 21, 66, 67

D
dAlembert, Jean 156
Damasio, Antonio 267
Daode jing, Laozi 25
Daoism 15, 21, 24, 25, 331
Darwin, Charles 61, 145, 212, 229, 230
Davidson, Donald 338
de Beauvoir, Simone 213, 269, 271, 2767,
288, 289
De Cive, Thomas Hobbes 113
de Condorcet, Nicolas 335
De Corpore, Thomas Hobbes 115
De Homine Figuris, Ren Descartes 118, 122
De Maistre, Joseph 335
de Medici family 104, 105, 105, 107
de Montaigne, Michel 1089, 124
de Saussure, Ferdinand 223
de Unamuno, Miguel 233
de Vitoria, Francisco 334
Deceit, Desire and the Novel, Ren Girard
338
deconstruction 288, 310, 311, 312
deduction 29, 264, 265, 340, 341
Deleuze, Gilles 338
Democritus 45, 65
Dennett, Daniel 303, 339
Derrida, Jacques 221, 288, 30813
Descartes, Ren 14, 15-16, 60, 63, 78, 79, 100,
101, 113, 115, 11623, 128, 240
David Hume 150

Edmund Husserl 225
Friedrich Schlegel 177
George Berkeley 138, 142
Gottfried Leibniz 134
Immanuel Kant 166, 167, 171
John Locke 130, 132
Jose Ortega y Gasset 242
Maurice Merleau-Ponty 275
St. Anselm 80
Dewey, John 209, 22831
dialectic 46, 49, 60, 70, 180, 182, 182, 183,
184, 185, 200, 201, 202, 203, 340
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion,
David Hume 150
Diderot, Denis 16, 144, 156
Diogenes of Sinope (the Cynic) 66, 67, 252,
253
Discourse on the Method, Ren Descartes 63,
120, 150
Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of
Inequality Among Men, Jean-Jacques
Rousseau 157, 158
Discourse on the Sciences and Arts,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 157
Discourses on the Ten Books of Titus Levy,
Niccol Machiavelli 106, 107
Du Bois, William 2345
Dukkha 31
Duns Scotus, John 71, 95, 333

E
Eckhart, Meister 333
Eichmann in Jerusalem, Hannah Arendt 272
Either/Or, Sren Kierkegaard 145
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 206, 207, 336
Emile, or On Education, Jean-Jacques
Rousseau 159, 175
Empedocles 20, 187, 330
empiricism 60, 63, 101, 134, 135, 144, 145,
340, 343
Aristotle 58, 59
David Hume 150, 153
Francis Bacon 110
George Berkeley 138, 139, 150
Immanuel Kant 166, 171, 171
John Locke 130, 133, 150
John Stuart Mill 191
William of Ockham 334
Encylopdie, Denis Diderot & Jean
dAlembert 144, 156
Engels, Friedrich 145, 189, 198, 203
enlightenment (Buddhism) 31, 32, 33, 245
Enneads, Plotinus 331
environmental philosophy 282, 283

Epicureanism 21, 64, 65
Epicurus 645, 67
epistemology 13, 341, 342
Albert Camus 284
Aristotle 58, 60
Boethius 74
Charles Sanders Peirce 205
David Hume 150, 153
Gottfried Leibniz 134, 137
Hlne Cixous 322
Henri Bergson 2267
Immanuel Kant 171
Jacques Derrida 310
Jean-Franois Lyotard 298
Johann Gottlieb Fichte 176
John Dewey 228
John Locke 130
Karl Jaspers 245
Maurice Merleau-Ponty 274
Michel Foucault 302
Paul Feyerabend 297
Plato 52
Ren Descartes 118, 121
Socrates 46
Voltaire 146
William James 206
Erasmus, Desiderius 71, 97, 100
Eriugena, Johannes Scotus 332
Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
John Locke 131
Essays, Michel de Montaigne 108, 109
Essays on the Human Understanding,
Gottfried Leibniz 133
ethics (moral philosophy) 14, 15, 17, 212, 341,
343
Ahad Haam 222
Alfred North Whitehead 336
Aristotle 61, 62
Arne Naess 282
Bertrand Russell 236
Confucius 37
Diogenes of Sinope 66
Emmanuel Levinas 273
Epicurus 64
Friedrich Nietzsche 21621
Hajime Tanabe 244
Hannah Arendt 272
Henry Sidgwick 336
Isaiah Berlin 28081
Jean-Paul Sartre 268
Jeremy Bentham 174
John Dewey 230, 231
Laozi 25
Ludwig Wittgenstein 250
Martha Nussbaum 339
Max Scheler 240
Michel de Montaigne 108
Noam Chomsky 304
Peter Singer 325

346 INDEX
Plato 55
Protagoras 42, 43
Richard Rorty 316, 317, 318
St. Augustine of Hippo 72
Siddhartha Gautama 33
Simone de Beauvoir 276
Tetsuro Watsuji 256
Theodor Adorno 266
Walter Benjamin 258
William Du Bois 234
Zeno of Citium 67
Ethics, Benedictus Spinoza 128
Euclid 29
existentialism 213, 341, 343
Ahad Haam 222
Albert Camus 284
Frantz Fanon 300
Friedrich Nietzsche 21621
Hannah Arendt 272
Jean-Paul Sartre 268
Jose Ortega y Gasset 242
Karl Jaspers 245
Martin Heidegger 255
Marxist existentialism 288
Miguel de Unamuno 233
Simone de Beauvoir 277
Sren Kierkegaard 194, 195
Tetsuro Watsuji 256, 262, 263

F
Fanon, Frantz 288, 289, 300301
Fear and Trembling, Sren Kierkegaard 145
feminism 175, 276, 277, 289, 320, 322, 323, 339
Feuerbach, Ludwig 189, 201, 202
Feyerabend, Paul 297
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 145, 171, 176
Foucault, Michel 288, 3023, 313
Frege, Gottlob 212, 336
Freud, Sigmund 188, 212, 213, 221

G
Gadamer, Hans-Georg 255, 26061
Galilei, Galileo 100, 110, 113, 168
Gandhi, Mahatma 204, 204
Gassendi, Pierre 113
Gauchet, Marcel 339
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers 80
Gautama, Siddhartha 20, 21, 3033, 233
Ginzberg, Asher 222

Girard, Ren 338
Grosseteste, Robert 333
Guattari, Flix 338
Guide of the Perplexed, Moses Maimonides
84, 85
Gutenberg, Johannes 71

H

Ibn Sn see Avicenna
idealism 139, 145, 341
Arthur Schopenhauer 186
Georg Hegel 180
George Berkeley 138
Immanuel Kant 166, 169, 170, 171, 176
Johann Gottlieb Fichte 176
imperialism 321
In Praise of Folly, Desiderius Erasmus 97
In Praise of Idleness, Bertrand Russell 236
Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation, Jeremy Bentham 144
Invention of Modern Science, Martha
Nussbaum 339
Iqbal, Muhammed 87
Irigaray, Luce 289, 320
Islam 15, 21, 71, 90, 332
Aristotle 62
Averroes 82, 83
Avicenna 77, 79
Jakobson, Roman 223
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi 867
James, William 145, 193, 2069
Jaspers, Karl 245
Jews & Judaism 84, 85, 90, 333, 334
Jung, Carl 188, 221

Haam, Ahad 222
Habermas, Jrgen 289, 3067
Hegel, Georg 145, 159, 17885, 259, 340
Arthur Schopenhauer 186, 188
Friedrich Schlegel 177
Immanuel Kant 171
Karl Marx 199, 200, 201, 202
Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach 189
Sren Kierkegaard 194, 195
Heidegger, Martin 195, 213, 245, 2525, 260
Edmund Husserl 225
Immanuel Kant 171
Heisenberg, Werner 255
Heraclitus 36, 40, 230
history, philosophy of 232, 26061
History of Great Britain, David Hume 153
Hobbes, Thomas 100, 101, 11215, 156, 158
How the Real World at Last Became a
Myth, Friedrich Nietzsche 218
How to do Things With Words, John
Langshaw Austin 338
How to Make our Ideas Clear, Charles
Sanders Peirce 228
humanism 71, 97, 100, 108, 341
Hume, David 17, 33, 60, 63, 73, 130, 134, 144,
14853
Adam Smith 160, 161
Edmund Burke 173
Gottfried Leibniz 137
Immanuel Kant 166
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 159
John Stuart Mill 190, 191
Karl Popper 262, 263
Husserl, Edmund 171, 212, 213, 2245, 243,
253, 255, 275
Hypatia of Alexandria 276, 331

K

IJ

L

Iamblichus 331
Ibn Bajja 333
Ibn Rushd see Averroes

Lacan, Jacques 288, 320
language 14, 212, 290, 291, 341
Donald Davidson 338

Kant and the Philosophic Method, John
Dewey 230
Kant, Immanuel 60, 63, 134, 144, 145,
16471, 176, 220, 227, 248, 303, 340
Arthur Schopenhauer 186, 187, 188
David Hume 153
Georg Hegel 181, 182, 183
Gottfried Leibniz 137
St. Anselm 80, 81
Kepler, Johannes 100
Keynes, John Maynard 193
Kierkegaard, Sren 145, 1945, 213
King, Martin Luther 204, 235, 235
Kong Fuzi see Confucius
Kristeva, Julia 323
Kuhn, Thomas 288, 293, 297

INDEX 347
Emmanuel Levinas 273
Ferdinand de Saussure 223
Georg Hegel 180
Gilbert Ryle 337
Jacques Derrida 312
John Langshaw Austin 338
John Locke 133
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24851, 296
Rudolf Carnap 257
language, philosophy of,
Ferdinand de Saussure 223
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24851
Roland Barthes 290
Willard Van Orman Quine 278
Laozi (Lao Tzu) 245, 30
Leibniz, Gottfried 14, 60, 63, 101, 1347
Immanuel Kant 167
John Locke 130, 132, 133
Leopold, Aldo 282, 283
Leucippus 45, 65
Leviathan, Thomas Hobbes 101, 113
Levinas, Emmanuel 255, 273, 313
liberal democracy 144, 213
liberalism 191, 193, 281
Linnaeus, Carol 60
Llull, Ramon 333
Locke, John 101, 13033, 146, 147, 150, 156,
158, 173, 175
Arthur Schopenhauer 187
empiricists 60, 63, 134
George Berkeley 138, 142
Immanuel Kant 166, 171
John Stuart Mill 190
logic 14, 17, 212, 337, 340, 341
Aristotle 61, 62, 62, 63
David Hume 151, 151
Ludwig Wittgenstein 248, 249, 250, 251
Rudolf Carnap 257
Logic, Aristotle 70
logical form 250, 250
logical positivism 153, 257
Lorenzo (de Medici) the Magnicent 104,
105, 105
Love and Knowledge, Max Scheler 240
Luhmann, Niklas 339
Luther, Martin 100, 110
Lyotard, Jean-Franois 289, 2989

M
Machiavelli, Niccol 100, 1027, 108, 109
Magga 31
Maimonides, Moses 845
Man a Machine, Julien Offray de la Mettrie 335
Mandeville, Bernard 335

Mann, Thomas 221
Mao Zedong 44, 203, 213
Marcuse, Herbert 259
Marx, Karl 15, 145, 159, 189, 196203, 204,
212, 238
Marxism 171, 213, 238, 299, 326, 338
Marxist existentialism 288
materialism 341
mathematics 14, 17, 20, 71
Age of Reason 101
Aristotle 59
Blaise Pascal 125
David Hume 151, 151
Immanuel Kant 167, 169
John Locke 132
Pythagoras 27, 28, 29
Thomas Hobbes 113
Voltaire 147
Mawlana see Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi
Mawlawi Order of Susm 87, 87
Meditations on First Philosophy, Ren
Descartes 100, 115, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123,
166
Meditations on Quixote, Jose Ortega y
Gasset 242
Mencius 39
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 2745
Mersenne, Marin 113
metaphilosophy 177, 324, 341
metaphysics 13, 15, 16, 341
Alfred North Whitehead 336
Arthur Schopenhauer 186
Avicenna 76
Benedictus Spinoza 126
Democritus 45
Francisco Surez 334
Georg Hegel 180
George Berkeley 138
Heraclitus 40
Immanuel Kant 166, 171
Leucippus 45
Parmenides 41
Pythagoras 26
Ren Descartes 118
Sren Kierkegaard 194
Thales of Miletus 22
Thomas Aquinas 90
Thomas Hobbes 112
Method, Edgar Morin 338
Methods of Ethics, Henry Sidgwick 336
Midgley, Mary 292
Mill, James 191
Mill, John Stuart 65, 144, 145, 19093
mimetic desire, theory of 338
mind 13, 77, 78, 79, 114, 115, 122, 127, 128,
129, 139, 275
philosophy of 124, 338
Minima Moralia, Theodor Adorno 266, 267
Mishneh Torah, Moses Maimonides 85, 85

Mohism 44
Monadology, Gottfried Leibniz 135
monads 136, 137, 334
monism 22, 40, 41, 126, 139, 180, 341
morality 14, 15, 21, 212
Friedrich Nietzsche 216
Laozi 25
Niccol Machiavelli 105, 106
Plato 55
Socrates 47, 48
Theodor Adorno 266, 267
More, Thomas 100
Morin, Edgar 338
Moses of Narbonne 83, 334
Mozi 44
Muhammad 70
Muslims 70, 78, 83, 83, 333
Mussolini, Benito 107
Mythologies, Roland Barthes 291

N
Naess, Arne 2823
Nagel, Thomas 285, 295
naturalism 232, 341
negative theology 84
neo-Platonism 70, 331, 332
neopragmatism 209
New Confucianism 39
New Essays of Human Understanding,
Gottfried Leibniz 101
New Organon, Francis Bacon 100
Newlands, John 29
Newton, Isaac 101, 110, 146
Nicolaus of Autrecourt 334
Nietzsche, Friedrich 188, 195, 212, 213,
21421
Nirodha 31
Nishida Kitaro 336
Northern Lights, Philip Pullman 79
noumenon 169, 182, 187, 188, 342, 343
number 20, 27, 28, 29
Nussbaum, Martha 295, 339

O
Oakeshott, Michael 337
Objectivism 337
Ockhams Razor 334
Of Grammatology, Jacques Derrida 310, 313
Offray de la Mettrie, Julien 335

348 INDEX
On Being Conservative, Michael Oakeshott
337
On Liberty, James Mill 193
On My Philosophy, Karl Jaspers 245
On Sense and Reference, Gottlob Frege
336
On the Origin of Species, Charles Darwin
145, 229
On the Pope, Joseph De Maistre 335
On the Soul, Aristotle 83
On the Soul, Avicenna 78
One-Way Street, Walter Benjamin 258, 290
Ontological Argument 80, 81
Ontological Relativity, Willard Van Orman
Quine 278
ontology 13, 224, 233, 242, 252, 253, 342
oppression 280, 281
Oration on the Dignity of Man, Giovanni Pico
della Mirandola 334
Order out of Chaos, Martha Nussbaum & Ilya
Priggogine 339
Organon, Aristotle 63
Orientalism, Edward Said 321
Ortega y Gasset, Jose 2423
Oruka, Henry Odera 289, 324
Oxford philosophy 338

PQ
Parmenides 41
Pascal, Blaise 101, 1245, 240
Peirce, Charles Sanders 205, 206, 207, 208,
209, 228, 231
Penses, Blaise Pascal 101, 124, 125
perception 13, 139, 140, 141, 187, 275
Phaedo, Plato 47, 49, 312
phenomenology 213, 342
Edmund Husserl 224, 225, 243, 253
Emmanuel Levinas 273
Gaston Bachelard 337
Hajime Tanabe 244
Immanuel Kant 171
Martin Heidegger 252
Maurice Merleau-Ponty 274, 275
Max Scheler 240
Simone de Beauvoir 277
Phenomenology of Spirit, Georg Hegel 145,
180, 184, 185
phenomenon 187, 188, 342
Philoponus, John 90, 91, 92, 332
philosophes 144
philosophic sagacity 324
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Richard
Rorty 316, 319
philosophy of history 232, 26061

philosophy of language,
Ferdinand de Saussure 223
Ludwig Wittgenstein 24851
Roland Barthes 290
Willard Van Orman Quine 278
Philosophy of Metaphysics, Hajime Tanabe
245
philosophy of mind 124, 338
philosophy of religion 342
Averroes 82
Desiderius Erasmus 97
Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach 189
Moses Maimonides 84
Nikolaus von Kues 96
St. Anselm 80
philosophy of science 342
Alfred North Whitehead 336
Francis Bacon 110
Karl Popper 262
Mary Midgley 292
Paul Feyerabend 297
Rudolf Carnap 257
Thomas Kuhn 293
physicalism 112
Physics, The Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle
63
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 334
Piero (de Medici) the Unfortunate 104
Plato 12, 15, 21, 5055, 59, 91, 219, 220, 291,
312, 318
Aristotle 58, 59, 60, 62
Avicenna 77
Christian theologians 96
Diogenes of Sinope 66
Iamblichus 331
John Locke 131, 132
Martin Heidegger 252
Protagoras 43
Pythagoras 29
rediscovered in Europe 71
St. Augustine of Hippo 63, 72
Socrates 46, 47
Sophists 43
Platonic-Aristotelian approach 80
Platonism 52, 70, 331
Christian 72, 74, 96
Plotinus 70, 331
political activism 235
political oppression 281
political philosophy 15, 212
Adam Smith 160
Edmund Burke 172
Edward Said 321
Frantz Fanon 300
Henry David Thoreau 204
Herbert Marcuse 259
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 156
John Rawls 2945
John Stuart Mill 190

Julia Kristeva 323
Jrgen Habermas 306
Karl Marx 198
Luce Irigaray 320
Martha Nussbaum 339
Mary Wollstonecraft 175
Niccol Machiavelli 104
Slavoj Zizek 326
politics 16
Confucianism 37, 39
Edgar Morin 338
John Locke 133
Laozi 25
Protagoras 43
Popper, Karl 153, 193, 213, 257, 2625
Porphyry 27
positivism 171, 335, 341
postcolonialism 321
post-humanism 339
postmodernism 288, 289, 298, 299, 342
Power and Invention, Martha Nussbaum 339
pragmatism 145, 342
Charles Sanders Peirce 205, 206
John Dewey 228
Richard Rorty 316
William Du Bois 234
William James 206, 209
Priestley, Joseph 173
Principia Mathematica, Bertrand Russell &
Alfred North Whitehead 212, 236, 338
printing press 71
process philosophy 336
Proclus 332
Proslogion, St. Anselm 71
Protagoras 423, 52, 55
psychology 17
Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint,
Franz Brentano 336
Ptolemy 21
Pullman, Philip 79
Pure Land Buddhism 245, 245
Pyrrho 331
Pythagoras 14, 20, 23, 269, 30, 36, 331
Quine, Willard Van Orman 2789
Quran 82, 83, 86, 87

R
racism 235, 300, 301
radical empiricism 209
Rambam see Maimonides, Moses
Rand, Ayn 337
rationalism 60, 63, 101, 144, 145, 167, 343
David Hume 153
Gottfried Leibniz 134, 135

INDEX 349
Immanuel Kant 171, 171
John Locke 131
Plato 55, 59
Ren Descartes 118, 123, 150
Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays,
Michael Oakeshott 337
Rawls, John 193, 289, 2945
realism 104, 106
Reason, Age of 100, 101, 144
reason and reasoning 12, 13, 14, 16, 101, 340,
341
Aristotle 61
Blaise Pascal 125
deductive 264
earliest questions 20
Henri Bergson 226
Heraclitus 40
Herbert Marcuse 259
Immanuel Kant 171, 248
induction 263
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 158, 159
John Locke 131, 132
Jose Ortega y Gasset 242, 243
Jrgen Habermas 306, 307
Plato 53, 54, 55
Protagoras 43
Pythagoras 29
Ren Descartes 119, 120, 122, 123, 132
scientic 118
Siddhartha Gautama 30, 31, 32, 33
Reason and Revolution, Herbert Marcuse 259
reincarnation 77, 331
relativism 42
religion 15
Blaise Pascal 124, 125
Buddhism 33
Confucius 37
earliest questions 20
Epicurus 64, 65
Francis Bacon 111, 111
Friedrich Nietzsche 218, 219, 220
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 159
Jean-Paul Sartre 270, 271
John Dewey 230, 231
Karl Marx 212
Laozi 24
Ludwig Feuerbach 201
Ludwig Wittgenstein 250
Marcel Gauchet 339
Protagoras 43
Pythagoras 27, 29
Ren Girard 338
Siddhartha Gautama 30, 31
Thomas Hobbes 114
William James 209, 209
religion, philosophy of 342
Averroes 82
Desiderius Erasmus 97
Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach 189

Moses Maimonides 84
Nikolaus von Kues 96
St. Anselm 80
Republic, Plato 15, 52, 55
Romanticism 144, 145
Immanuel Kant 171
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 156
John Stuart Mill 191
Rorty, Richard 209, 31419
Roshi, Robert Aitken 283
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 144, 1549, 160,
173, 175, 202, 204
Rumi, Jalal ad-Din Muhammad 867
Russell, Bertrand 16, 193, 209, 212, 2369,
249, 251
Ryle, Gilbert 79, 337

S
Sage Philosophy, Henry Odera Oruka 289,
324
Said, Edward 301, 321
St. Anselm 71, 8081
St. Augustine of Hippo 55, 63, 70, 723, 97,
121
Saint Paul 266
Samudaya 31
Santayana, George 232
Sartre, Jean-Paul 195, 213, 221, 255, 26871,
277, 288, 301
Savonarola, Girolamo 104
Scheler, Max 240
Schelling, Friedrich 145, 171, 180, 335
Schlegel, Friedrich 177
Scholasticism 70, 100, 113
Schopenhauer, Arthur 17, 33, 145, 1868,
212
science 13, 14, 15, 1617, 20, 23, 71, 212
Age of Reason 101
Aristotle 59, 60, 62, 63
Blaise Pascal 125
Charles Sanders Peirce 205
David Hume 153, 153
Edmund Husserl 224, 225
Francis Bacon 110, 111, 111
Gaston Bachelard 337
Georg Hegel 180
Immanuel Kant 166, 167, 168, 170
Isabelle Stengers 339
Jean-Jacques Rousseau 157
John Dewey 231
Ludwig Wittgenstein 250
Pythagoras 27
Ren Descartes 118
scientic theory 262, 263, 265

Theodor Adorno 267
Thomas Hobbes 112, 113, 114
Thomas Kuhn 293
Voltaire 147
Science of Logic, Georg Hegel 1823
science, philosophy of 342
Alfred North Whitehead 336
Francis Bacon 110
Karl Popper 262
Mary Midgley 292
Paul Feyerabend 297
Rudolf Carnap 257
Thomas Kuhn 293
scientic method 49, 111
Scientic Revolution 110, 118
self 17, 78, 79
Sellars, Wilfred 317
semiotics 223, 290, 343
Sense and Sensibilia, John Langshaw Austin
338
senses 13, 59, 59, 60, 63
Arthur Schopenhauer 187
George Berkeley 140
John Locke 130, 132, 133
Plato 52, 53, 54, 55
Ren Descartes 119, 119
Serres, Michel 339
Sex and Genealogies, Luce Irigaray 320
Sex and Social Justice, Martha Nussbaum
339
Shinran, Hajime Tanabe 245, 245
Siddhartha Gautama 3033
Sidgwick, Henry 336
Siger of Brabant 83
sincerity 37, 38
Singer, Peter 325
Sisyphus 284, 285
skepticism 21, 146, 343
Nicolaus of Autrecourt 334
Pyrrho 331
Ren Descartes 120, 122
slavery 193, 235
Smith, Adam 16063, 200, 202
social contract 133, 156, 159, 2945
socialism 202, 202
society 16, 17, 21, 1723, 307
socio-economic classes 200, 201
Socrates 12, 14, 20, 21, 39, 469, 224, 291,
312, 318
Aristotle 62
Diogenes of Sinope 66
Edmund Husserl 225
Epicurus 64
Hajime Tanabe 244, 245
Plato 52, 55
Protagoras 43
solipsism 140, 343
Sophists 43, 46, 343
Sorties, Hlne Cixous 322

350
soul 13, 15, 16
al-Kind 332
Aquinas 94, 95
Plato 54
Plotinus 331
Spinoza, Bendictus (Baruch) 80, 1269, 130,
134
Stalin, Josef 213
Stalinist Russia 203
Stengers, Isabelle 339
stoicism 21, 62, 67, 70
structuralism 288, 289
Surez, Francisco 334
suffrage 193
suffragette movement 175
Susm 86, 87
syllogism 61, 62
Symposium, Plato 47
System of Logic, John Stuart Mill 191

T
Tanabe, Hajime 2445
Taylor, Harriet 191, 193
teleology 62, 343
Thales of Miletus 20, 223, 36, 40
Thatcher, Margaret 323
The Book of Healing, Avicenna 77, 78
The City of God, St. Augustine of Hippo
121
The Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx 198,
200, 201, 202, 202, 203
The Concept of Anxiety, Sren Kierkegaard
195
The Consequences of Pragmatism, Richard
Rorty 316
The Consolation of Philosophy, Boethius 75,
75
The Disenchantment of the World: A Political
History of Religion, Marcel Gauchet 339
The Ego and the Id, Sigmund Freud 213
The Essence of Christianity, Ludwig Andreas
Feuerbach 189
The Fable of Bees, Bernard Mandeville 335
The Foundations of Arithmetic, Gottlob
Frege 336
The Fountainhead, Ayn Rand 337
The Fragility of Goodness, Martha
Nussbaum 339
The Idea of Phenomenology, Edmund Husserl
212
The Life of Reason, George Santayana 232
The Logic of Scientic Discovery, Karl Popper
213, 265
The Myth of Sisyphus, Albert Camus 284

The Opinions of Philosophers, al-Ghazl 332
The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the
Human Sciences, Michel Foucault 302
The Phenomenology of Perception, Maurice
Merleau-Ponty 275
The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, Ernst
Cassirer 337
The Physical Language as the Universal
Language of Science, Rudolf Carnap 257
The Postmodern Condition: A Report on the
State of Knowledge, Jean-Franois
Lyotard 289, 298, 299
The Prince, Niccol Machiavelli 100, 105, 106,
107
The Principle of Hope, Ernst Bloch 337
The Principles of Mathematics, Bertrand
Russell & Alfred North Whitehead 212
The Principles of Morals and Legislation,
Jeremy Bentham 174
The Principles of Psychology, William James
145
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism, Max Weber 238
The Revolt of the Masses, Jose Ortega y
Gasset 243
The Sand County Almanac, Aldo Leopold
282
The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir 276,
277, 288
The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
144, 157, 158, 173
The Society of Society, Niklas Luhmann
339
The Structure of Scientic Revolution,
Thomas Kuhn 288, 293
The Symposium, Plato 291
The Tragic Sense of Life, Miguel de
Unamuno 233
The Way and its Power, Laozi 25
The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith 161, 162,
163
Theano of Crotona 27
Thoreau, Henry David 204, 206
Three Baskets, Siddhartha Gautama 31
Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Friedrich Nietzsche
216, 217, 221
time 166, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 170
Tipitaka, Siddhartha Gautama 31
Torah 84, 85, 334
Totality and Innity, Emmanuel Levinas 273
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Ludwig
Wittgenstein 212, 24851
transcendental idealism 166, 169, 170, 171
Truth and Method, Hans-Georg Gadamer
261
Twilight of the Idols, Friedrich Nietzsche 217,
219
Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin 280,
281

UVW
Universal Treatise, Nicolaus of Autrecourt
334
universalism 304, 343
utilitarianism 144, 343
Henry Sidgwick 336
Jeremy Bentham 174, 191, 192
John Stuart Mill 190, 192, 193
Mozi 44
Peter Singer 325
Utilitarianism, John Stuart Mill 145
van Orman Quine, Willard 2789
Vedism 30
Vesalius, Andreas 110
Violence and the Sacred, Ren Girard 338
Virtuous City, al-Frb 332
Vita Pythagorae, Porphyry 27
vitalism 2267
Voltaire 13, 144, 1464, 156, 157, 159
voluntarism 124, 125
von Kues, Nikolaus 96, 334
Wang Bi 331
Warhol, Andy 296
Watsuji, Tetsuro 256
Weber, Max 238
Wegner, Dan 303
What is Philosophy, Ren Girard & Flix
Guattari 338
Whitehead, Alfred North 55, 212, 238, 336
William of Ockham 71, 95, 334
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 209, 212, 238, 24851,
296
Wollheim, Richard 296
Wollstonecraft, Mary 175
women 276, 277, 277
votes for 193, 193
womens rights 175, 191, 335, 336
Woolf, Virginia 209
Writing and Defence, Jacques Derrida 288

XYZ
Yeats, William Butler 221
Zarathustra 216, 217, 217, 220
Zen Buddhism 337
Zeno of Citium 21, 67
Zeno of Elea 14, 331
iek, Slavoj 326
Zoroaster 216, 217

351

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dorling Kindersley would like to thank Debra
Wolter and Nigel Ritchie for their editorial
assistance, Vicky Short for her design
assistance, and Jane Parker for providing
the index and proofreading the book.

PICTURE CREDITS
The publisher would like to thank the
following for their kind permission to
reproduce their photographs:
(Key: a-above; b-below/bottom; c-center;
l-left; r-right; t-top)
23 Getty Images: Hulton Archive (tr).
25 Corbis: Chan Yat Nin / Redlink (cl).
Getty Images: Hulton Archive (bl).
27 Alamy Images: Gianni Dagli Orti /
The Art Archive (bl). 29 Getty Images:
M. Bertinetti / De Agostini Picture Library (br).
31 Alamy Images: INTERFOTO (tr).
32 The Bridgeman Art Library: Muse
Guimet, Paris / Bonora (tl). 36 Getty Images:
Keren Su (bl). 38 Corbis: Christian Kober /
JAI (tr). 39 The Art Archive: (br).
41 Corbis: Visuals Unlimited (cra).
43 akg-images: Wadsworth Atheneum (bl).
Getty Images: G. Dagli Orti / De Agostini
Picture Library (cr). 44 Corbis: Bettmann
(cr). 47 Corbis: PoodlesRock (tr). 49 Corbis:
(br). 53 The Bridgeman Art Library:
Bibliothque nationale, Paris / Archives
Charmet (br). 55 The Bridgeman Art
Library: Pinacoteca Capitolina, Palazzo
Conservatori, Rome / Alinari (tl). Corbis:
Jon Hicks (bl). 59 Getty Images: The
Bridgeman Art Library (tl). 60 Corbis:
Elizabeth Whiting & Associates (tl).
63 akg-images: British Library (tl). Getty
Images: SuperStock (bl). 64 Runion
des Muses Nationaux Agence
Photographique: Herv Lewandowski (bc).
65 Corbis: Araldo de Luca (tr). 66 The
Bridgeman Art Library: Walters Art
Museum, Baltimore, USA (cra). 73 Getty
Images: The Bridgeman Art Library (bl);
SuperStock (tr). 75 The Bridgeman Art
Library: Bibliothque municipale, Rouen /
Giraudon (tr). Getty Images: Hulton
Archive (bl). 77 Alamy Images: Mary

Evans Picture Library (tr). 78 Alamy
Images: Gianni Dagli Orti / The Art Archive
(bl). 79 The Kobal Collection: New Line
Cinema (br). 81 Getty Images: Hulton
Archive (tr). 83 Corbis: Bettmann (bl).
Photolibrary: Dariush Zandi / GraphEast
RM (cr). 85 Getty Images: The Bridgeman
Art Library (bl); Danita Delimont / Gallo
Images (tr). 87 Alamy Images: Gianni
Dagli Orti / The Art Archive (tr). Getty
Images: Bruno Morandi / The Image Bank
(tl). 90 Getty Images: Science & Society
Picture Library (bl). 91 Alamy Images:
Gianni Dagli Orti / The Art Archive (tl).
92 Alamy Images: Gianni Dagli Orti / The
Art Archive (b). 94 Getty Images: Chad
Baker (bc). 95 NASA: LAMBDA / WMAP
Science Team (tr). 105 Corbis: Massimo
Listri (tl). 107 Corbis: Bettmann (tr) (bl).
109 Alamy Images: Gianni Dagli Orti /
The Art Archive (bl). Corbis: Bettmann (tr).
111 akg-images: (tl). Corbis: Bettmann
(tr). 113 Corbis: Bettmann (tr). 114 Science
Photo Library: David McCarthy.
115 Corbis: Bettmann (br). 118 Getty
Images: Hulton Archive (cra).
120 akg-images: Cameraphoto (tl).
122 Corbis: Bettmann (bl). 123 Corbis:
Alberto Estevez / EPA (br). 125 Corbis:
Michael Nicholson (bl); Bill Varie (tr).
128 Alamy Images: Gari Wyn Williams (tl).
Corbis: Bettmann (bl). 129 Dorling
Kindersley: Natural History Museum,
London (cr/ower on rock). 133 Corbis:
Bettmann (bl); LWA - Dann Tardif (tr).
135 Corbis: Bettmann (tr). 136 Science
Photo Library: Matthew Hurst (tl).
137 Getty Images: Science & Society
Picture Library (tr). 139 Corbis: Bettmann (tr).
147 Corbis: Bettmann (bl). Getty Images:
G. Dagli Orti / De Agostini Picture Library
(tr). 150 Corbis: Michael Nicholson.
151 Corbis: Ken Seet (bl). 152 Corbis:
Tomas del Amo - The Stock Connec /
Science Faction (clb/tap). 153 Alamy
Images: Lebrecht Music & Arts Photo
Library (tr). 157 The Bridgeman Art
Library: Detroit Institute of Arts, USA (bl).
Corbis: Bettmann (tr). 158 Alamy
Images: V&A Images (bl). 159 Getty
Images: Peter Willi / SuperStock (br).
161 Corbis: Hulton-Deutsch Collection (tr).
162 The Art Archive: Museum of London

(bl). 163 Corbis: Karen Kasmauski (tr).
166 Dorling Kindersley: Stephen Oliver
(tr) (tl/tree in summer). 169 Getty Images:
Matheisl (tl/tree in winter). 170 Corbis:
Bettmann (bl). 171 Getty Images: Hulton
Archive (tr). 173 Corbis: Bettmann (tr);
Gianni Dagli Orti / The Art Archive (bc).
177 Getty Images: David Sanger / The
Image Bank (br). 180 The Bridgeman Art
Library: American Illustrators Gallery, NYC /
www.asapworldwide.com (tr). Corbis:
Bettmann (bl). 184 The Bridgeman Art
Library: Chteau de Versailles (bl).
185 The Bridgeman Art Library:
Germanisches Nationalmuseum, Nuremberg
(Nuernberg) (br). 187 Getty Images:
Time Life Pictures / Mansell (tr).
188 akg-images: British Library (bl).
189 The Bridgeman Art Library:
National Gallery, London (br). 191 Corbis:
Bettmann (tr). 192 Corbis: Todd Gipstein
(bl). 193 Corbis: Bettmann (tc).
195 Corbis: Bettmann (bl); Robbie Jack (tr).
198 Corbis: Alfredo Dagli Orti / The Art
Archive (tr). 200 Getty Images: The
Bridgeman Art Library (bl). 201 Alamy
Images: Gianni Dagli Orti / The Art Archive
(br). 202 Alamy Images: Gianni Dagli Orti /
The Art Archive (tl). 203 The Bridgeman
Art Library: Private Collection (bl). Corbis:
Bettmann (tr). 204 Alamy Images: Dinodia
Images / India Images (br). 208 akg-images:
(tl). Corbis: (bl). 209 Corbis: Bettmann (bl).
217 Corbis: Bettmann (bl); Kazuyoshi
Nomachi (tr). 218 Corbis: Bettmann (bl).
219 Corbis: Bettmann (ca/Apollo); Jon
Hicks (cra/saint). 220 Corbis: The Gallery
Collection (tl). 221 Getty Images: Hulton
Archive (b). 225 Getty Images: Jeffrey
Coolidge (bl); Imagno / Hulton Archive (tr).
227 Corbis: Bettmann (bl). Getty Images:
Richard Passmore (tr). 229 Corbis:
Bettmann (tr). 230 Getty Images: G. Dagli
Orti / De Agostini Picture Library (tr).
231 Corbis: Philadelphia Museum of Art (tl).
232 Corbis: Alan Schein Photography (bc).
235 Corbis: Bettmann (bl); Hulton-Deutsch
Collection (tr). 237 Getty Images: MPI (tr).
238 Corbis: Bettmann (clb). 239 The
Advertising Archives. 241 Corbis:
The Gallery Collection (b). 243 Corbis:
Bettmann (tr). TopFoto.co.uk: FotoWare
FotoStation (bl). 245 The Bridgeman Art

352
Library: Archives Charmet (tl). 249 Getty
Images: The Bridgeman Art Library (br).
250 Getty Images: Travelpix Ltd /
Photographers Choice (tl). 251 Getty
Images: Hulton Archive (tr). 254 Alamy
Images: Mary Evans Picture Library (tl).
255 The Bridgeman Art Library:
Bonhams, London / Private Collection (bl).
Corbis: Bettmann (tr). 256 Alamy
Images: J. Marshall / Tribaleye Images (br).
258 Corbis: Tommy Olofsson / Nordicphotos
(cb). 259 The Advertising Archives: (br).
261 akg-images: Ullstein Bild (bl).
263 Photolibrary: Johann Schumacher (tr).
265 Getty Images: Altrendo Images (tr);
Keystone / Hulton Archive (bl). 267 Corbis:
(tc). Getty Images: Imagno / Hulton
Archive (tr). 269 Corbis: Bettmann (tr).
271 Getty Images: AFP / Central Press /
Hulton Archive. 272 Corbis: Bettmann (cr).
273 Corbis: Chaiwat Subprasom / Reuters

(br). 275 Corbis: Dan McCoy - Rainbow /
Science Faction (bc). TopFoto.co.uk: (tr).
277 The Advertising Archives: (bc).
Getty Images: Hulton Archive (tr).
279 Alamy Images: Geoff A. Howard (bl).
281 Getty Images: Gemma Levine (tr).
Photolibrary: Art Media (tl). 283 Corbis:
Elisabet Zeilon / Etsa (tr). Press
Association Images: Per Lochen / Scanpix
(bl). 285 akg-images: Album / Oronoz (tl).
Getty Images: RDA (bl). 291 Ashmolean
Museum, Oxford: (cr). Corbis: Bettmann
(bl). 293 Corbis: (br). 295 Getty Images:
artpartner-images (b); Steve Pyke (tr). 296
Corbis:  The Andy Warhol Foundation for
the Visual Arts, Inc. / DACS, London, 2010.
Trademarks Licensed by Campbell Soup
Company. All Rights Reserved (cr). 299
akg-images: Anna Weise (bl). Corbis: Chip
East / Reuters (tr). 301 Getty Images:
Buyenlarge (cr). 303 The Bridgeman Art

Library: Ken Welsh / Private Collection (tl).
Corbis: Bettmann (bl). 305 Corbis:
Christopher Felver (tr); PoodlesRock (bc).
306 Alamy Images: The Print Collector
(bc). 307 Alamy Images: INTERFOTO (bl).
310 Getty Images: Taro Yamasaki / Time
Life Pictures (br). 311 iStockphoto.com:
BSJ (tl). 313 Corbis: Sophie Bassouls /
Sygma (tr); Jack Burlot / Apis / Sygma (tl).
318 Corbis: Nic Bothma / EPA (tl).
319 Getty Images: Marty Katz / Time Life
Pictures (tr); Shawn Thew / AFP (bl).
323 Alamy Images: Tim Graham (br).
324 Photoshot: (bc). 326 Getty Images:
Libor Hajsky / AFP (cr).

All other images  Dorling Kindersley
For further information see:
www.dkimages.com

philosophy from greek  philosophia love of wisdom is the study of general and fundamental questions about existence knowledge values reason mind and language. such questions are often posed as problems to be studied or resolved. the term was probably coined by pythagoras c.    bce. philosophical methods include questioning critical discussion rational argument and systematic presentation.i

classic philosophical questions include is it possible to know anything and to prove it and what is most real philosophers also pose more practical and concrete questions such as is there a best way to live is it better to be just or unjust if one can get away with it do humans have free will

historically philosophy encompassed all bodies of knowledge. from the time of ancient greek philosopher aristotle to the th century natural philosophy encompassed astronomy medicine and physics. for example newtons  mathematical principles of natural philosophy later became classified as a book of physics.

in the th century the growth of modern research universities led academic philosophy and other disciplines to professionalize and specialize. in the modern era some investigations that were traditionally part of philosophy became separate academic disciplines including psychology sociology linguistics and economics. other investigations closely related to art science politics or other pursuits remained part of philosophy. for example is beauty objective or subjective are there many scientific methods or just one is political utopia a hopeful dream or hopeless fantasy

major sub-fields of academic philosophy include metaphysics which is concerned with the fundamental nature of reality and being; and epistemology which is about nature and grounds of knowledge andits limits and validity; as well as ethics aesthetics political philosophy logic and philosophy of science.


initially the term philosophy referred to any body of knowledge. in this sense philosophy is closely related to religion mathematics natural science education and politics. though as of the s it has been classified as a book of physics newtons mathematical principles of natural philosophy  uses the term natural philosophy as it was understood at the time to encompass disciplines such as astronomy medicine and physics that later became associated with sciences.

in the first part of his academica  cicero introduced the division of philosophy into logic physics and ethics emulating epicurus division of his doctrine into canon physics and ethics.

in section thirteen of his lives and opinions of the eminent philosophers  diogenes lartius rd century the first historian of philosophy established the traditional division of philosophical inquiry into three parts

natural philosophy i.e. physics from greek ta physika lit. things having to do with physis nature was the study of the constitution and processes of transformation in the physical world;
moral philosophy i.e. ethics from thika having to do with character disposition manners was the study of goodness right and wrong justice and virtue; and
metaphysical philosophy i.e. logic from logiks of or pertaining to reason or speech was the study of existence causation god logic forms and other abstract objects meta ta physika after the physics.
this division is not obsolete but has changed natural philosophy has split into the various natural sciences especially physics astronomy chemistry biology and cosmology; moral philosophy has birthed the social sciences while still including value theory e.g. ethics aesthetics political philosophy etc.; and metaphysical philosophy has given way to formal sciences such as logic mathematics and philosophy of science while still including epistemology cosmology etc.

many philosophical debates that began in ancient times are still debated today. mcginn  and others claim that no philosophical progress has occurred during that interval. chalmers  and others by contrast see progress in philosophy similar to that in science while brewer  argued that progress is the wrong standard by which to judge philosophical activity.

in one general sense philosophy is associated with wisdom intellectual culture and a search for knowledge. in this sense all cultures and literate societies ask philosophical questions such as how are we to live and what is the nature of reality. a broad and impartial conception of philosophy then finds a reasoned inquiry into such matters as reality morality and life in all world civilizations.

statue of aristotle in the aristotlepark of stagira
western philosophy is the philosophical tradition of the western world dating back to pre-socratic thinkers who were active in th-century greece bce such as thales c.   bce and pythagoras c.   bce who practiced a love of wisdom latin philosophia and were also termed students of nature physiologoi.

western philosophy can be divided into three eras

while our knowledge of the ancient era begins with thales in the th century bce comparatively little is known about the philosophers who came before socrates commonly known as the pre-socratics. the ancient era was dominated by greek philosophical schools which were significantly influenced by socrates teachings. most notable among these were plato who founded the platonic academy and his student aristotle who founded the peripatetic school. other ancient philosophical traditions included cynicism stoicism skepticism and epicureanism. important topics covered by the greeks included metaphysics with competing theories such as atomism and monism cosmology the nature of the well-lived life eudaimonia the possibility of knowledge and the nature of reason logos. with the rise of the roman empire greek philosophy was also increasingly discussed in latin by romans such as cicero and seneca see roman philosophy.


medieval philosophy thth centuries is the period following the fall of the western roman empire and was dominated by the rise of christianity and hence reflects judeo-christian theological concerns as well as retaining a continuity with greco-roman thought. problems such as the existence and nature of god the nature of faith and reason metaphysics the problem of evil were discussed in this period. some key medieval thinkers include st. augustine thomas aquinas boethius anselm and roger bacon. philosophy for these thinkers was viewed as an aid to theology ancilla theologiae and hence they sought to align their philosophy with their interpretation of sacred scripture. this period saw the development of scholasticism a text critical method developed in medieval universities based on close reading and disputation on key texts. the renaissance period saw increasing focus on classic greco-roman thought and on a robust humanism.


early modern philosophy in the western world begins with thinkers such as thomas hobbes and ren descartes . following the rise of natural science modern philosophy was concerned with developing a secular and rational foundation for knowledge and moved away from traditional structures of authority such as religion scholastic thought and the church. major modern philosophers include spinoza leibniz locke berkeley hume and kant.iiiiiiv

th-century philosophy sometimes called late modern philosophy was influenced by the wider th-century movement termed the enlightenment and includes figures such as hegel a key figure in german idealism kierkegaard who developed the foundations for existentialism nietzsche a famed anti-christian john stuart mill who promoted utilitarianism karl marx who developed the foundations for communism and the american william james. the th century saw the split between analytic philosophy and continental philosophy as well as philosophical trends such as phenomenology existentialism logical positivism pragmatism and the linguistic turn see contemporary philosophy.


an iranian portrait of avicenna on a silver vase. he was one of the most influential philosophers of the islamic golden age.
see also islamic philosophy and middle eastern philosophy
the regions of the fertile crescent iran and arabia are home to the earliest known philosophical wisdom literature and is today mostly dominated by islamic culture. early wisdom literature from the fertile crescent was a genre which sought to instruct people on ethical action practical living and virtue through stories and proverbs. in ancient egypt these texts were known as sebayt teachings and they are central to our understandings of ancient egyptian philosophy. babylonian astronomy also included much philosophical speculations about cosmology which may have influenced the ancient greeks. jewish philosophy and christian philosophy are religio-philosophical traditions that developed both in the middle east and in europe which both share certain early judaic texts mainly the tanakh and monotheistic beliefs. jewish thinkers such as the geonim of the talmudic academies in babylonia and maimonides engaged with greek and islamic philosophy. later jewish philosophy came under strong western intellectual influences and includes the works of moses mendelssohn who ushered in the haskalah the jewish enlightenment jewish existentialism and reform judaism.

pre-islamic iranian philosophy begins with the work of zoroaster one of the first promoters of monotheism and of the dualism between good and evil. this dualistic cosmogony influenced later iranian developments such as manichaeism mazdakism and zurvanism.

after the muslim conquests early islamic philosophy developed the greek philosophical traditions in new innovative directions. this islamic golden age influenced european intellectual developments. the two main currents of early islamic thought are kalam which focuses on islamic theology and falsafa which was based on aristotelianism and neoplatonism. the work of aristotle was very influential among the falsafa such as al-kindi th century avicenna   june  and averroes th century. others such as al-ghazali were highly critical of the methods of the aristotelian falsafa. islamic thinkers also developed a scientific method experimental medicine a theory of optics and a legal philosophy. ibn khaldun was an influential thinker in philosophy of history.

in iran several schools of islamic philosophy continued to flourish after the golden age and include currents such as illuminationist philosophy sufi philosophy and transcendent theosophy. the th- and th-century arab world saw the nahda awakening; aka the arab renaissance movement which influenced contemporary islamic philosophy.

indian philosophy sanskrit darana lit. point of view perspective refers to the diverse philosophical traditions that emerged since the ancient times on the indian subcontinent. jainism and buddhism originated at the end of the vedic period while hinduism emerged after the period as a fusion of diverse traditions.

hindus generally classify these traditions as either orthodox stika or heterodox nstika depending on whether they accept the authority of the vedas and the theories of brahman eternal conscious irreducible and tman soul self breathe therein. the orthodox schools include the hindu traditions of thought while the heterodox schools include the buddhist and the jain traditions.v other schools include the ajana jvika and crvka which became extinct over their history.

important indian philosophical concepts shared by the indian philosophies and virtues include

akalanka an th century jain monk and philosopher who wrote influential works on indian logic
main article jain philosophy
jain philosophy accepts the concept of a permanent soul jiva as one of the five astikayas eternal infinite categories that make up the substance of existence. the other four being dhrma adharma ka space and pudgala matter.

the jain thought separates matter from the soul completely with two major subtraditions digambara sky dressed naked and vtmbara white dressed along with several more minor traditions such as terapanthi.

asceticism is a major monastic virtue in jainism. jain texts such as the tattvartha sutra state that right faith right knowledge and right conduct is the path to liberation. the jain thought holds that all existence is cyclic eternal and uncreated. the tattvartha sutra is the earliest known most comprehensive and authoritative compilation of jain philosophy.

monks debating at sera monastery tibet . according to jan westerhoff public debates constituted the most important and most visible forms of philosophical exchange in ancient indian intellectual life.
buddhist philosophy begins with the thought of gautama buddha fl. between th and th century bce and is preserved in the early buddhist texts. it originated in india and later spread to east asia tibet central asia and southeast asia developing various traditions in these regions. mahayana forms are the dominant buddhist philosophical traditions in east asian regions such as china korea and japan. the theravada forms are dominant in southeast asian countries such as sri lanka burma and thailand.

because ignorance to the true nature of things is considered one of the roots of suffering dukkha buddhist philosophy is concerned with epistemology metaphysics ethics and psychology. buddhist philosophical texts must also be understood within the context of meditative practices which are supposed to bring about certain cognitive shifts. key innovative concepts include the four noble truths as an analysis of dukkha anicca impermanence and anatta non-self.vi

after the death of the buddha various groups began to systematize his main teachings eventually developing comprehensive philosophical systems termed abhidharma. following the abhidharma schools mahayana philosophers such as nagarjuna and vasubandhu developed the theories of nyat emptiness of all phenomena and vijapti-matra appearance only a form of phenomenology or transcendental idealism. the dignga school of prama means of knowledge promoted a sophisticated form of buddhist logico-epistemology.

there were numerous schools sub-schools and traditions of buddhist philosophy in india. according to oxford professor of buddhist philosophy jan westerhoff the major indian schools from  bce to  ce werexxiv

after the disappearance of buddhism from india some of these philosophical traditions continued to develop in the tibetan buddhist east asian buddhist and theravada buddhist traditions.citation needed


adi shankara is one of the much studied hindu philosophers.
main article hindu philosophy
the vedas-based orthodox schools are a part of the hindu traditions and they are traditionally classified into six daranas nyaya vaisheshika samkhya yoga mms and vedanta.vii the vedas as a knowledge source were interpreted differently by these six schools of hindu philosophy with varying degrees of overlap. they represent a collection of philosophical views that share a textual connection according to chadha . they also reflect a tolerance for a diversity of philosophical interpretations within hinduism while sharing the same foundation.viii

some of the earliest surviving hindu mystical and philosophical texts are the upanishads of the later vedic period  bce. hindu philosophers of the six schools developed systems of epistemology pramana and investigated topics such as metaphysics ethics psychology gua hermeneutics and soteriology within the framework of the vedic knowledge while presenting a diverse collection of interpretations. these schools of philosophy accepted the vedas and the vedic concept of tman and brahmanvii differed from the following indian religions that rejected the authority of the vedas

crvka a materialism school that accepted the existence of free will.
jvika a materialism school that denied the existence of free will.
buddhism a philosophy that denies the existence of tman unchanging soul selfixx and is based on the teachings and enlightenment of gautama buddha.xi
jainism a philosophy that accepts the existence of the tman but is based on the teachings of twenty-four ascetic teachers known as tirthankaras with rishabha as the first and mahavira as the twenty-fourth.
the commonly named six orthodox schools over time led to what has been called the hindu synthesis as exemplified by its scripture the bhagavad gita.

kitar nishida professor of philosophy at kyoto university and founder of the kyoto school.
main articles chinese philosophy korean philosophy japanese philosophy vietnamese philosophy and eastern philosophy
east asian philosophical thought began in ancient china and chinese philosophy begins during the western zhou dynasty and the following periods after its fall when the hundred schools of thought flourished th century to  bce. this period was characterized by significant intellectual and cultural developments and saw the rise of the major philosophical schools of china confucianism legalism and daoism as well as numerous other less influential schools. these philosophical traditions developed metaphysical political and ethical theories such tao yin and yang ren and li which along with chinese buddhism directly influenced korean philosophy vietnamese philosophy and japanese philosophy which also includes the native shinto tradition. buddhism began arriving in china during the han dynasty  bce   ce through a gradual silk road transmission and through native influences developed distinct chinese forms such as chan/zen which spread throughout the east asian cultural sphere. during later chinese dynasties like the ming dynasty  as well as in the korean joseon dynasty  a resurgent neo-confucianism led by thinkers such as wang yangming  became the dominant school of thought and was promoted by the imperial state.

in the modern era chinese thinkers incorporated ideas from western philosophy. chinese marxist philosophy developed under the influence of mao zedong while a chinese pragmatism under hu shih and new confucianisms rise was influenced by xiong shili. modern japanese thought meanwhile developed under strong western influences such as the study of western sciences rangaku and the modernist meirokusha intellectual society which drew from european enlightenment thought. the th century saw the rise of state shinto and also japanese nationalism. the kyoto school an influential and unique japanese philosophical school developed from western phenomenology and medieval japanese buddhist philosophy such as that of dogen.

african philosophy is philosophy produced by african people philosophy that presents african worldviews ideas and themes or philosophy that uses distinct african philosophical methods. modern african thought has been occupied with ethnophilosophy with defining the very meaning of african philosophy and its unique characteristics and what it means to be african. during the th century ethiopian philosophy developed a robust literary tradition as exemplified by zera yacob. another early african philosopher was anton wilhelm amo c.  who became a respected philosopher in germany. distinct african philosophical ideas include ujamaa the bantu idea of force ngritude pan-africanism and ubuntu. contemporary african thought has also seen the development of professional philosophy and of africana philosophy the philosophical literature of the african diaspora which includes currents such as black existentialism by african-americans. some modern african thinkers have been influenced by marxism african-american literature critical theory critical race theory postcolonialism and feminism.

a tlamatini aztec philosopher observing the stars from the codex mendoza.
indigenous-american philosophical thought consists of a wide variety of beliefs and traditions among different american cultures. among some of u.s. native american communities there is a belief in a metaphysical principle called the great spirit siouan wak tka; algonquian gitche manitou. another widely shared concept was that of orenda spiritual power. according to whiteley  for the native americans mind is critically informed by transcendental experience dreams visions and so on as well as by reason. the practices to access these transcendental experiences are termed shamanism. another feature of the indigenous american worldviews was their extension of ethics to non-human animals and plants.

in mesoamerica aztec philosophy was an intellectual tradition developed by individuals called tlamatini those who know something and its ideas are preserved in various aztec codices. the aztec worldview posited the concept of an ultimate universal energy or force called metetl dual cosmic energy which sought a way to live in balance with a constantly changing slippery world.

the theory of teotl can be seen as a form of pantheism. aztec philosophers developed theories of metaphysics epistemology values and aesthetics. aztec ethics was focused on seeking tlamatiliztli knowledge wisdom which was based on moderation and balance in all actions as in the nahua proverb the middle good is necessary.

the inca civilization also had an elite class of philosopher-scholars termed the amawtakuna who were important in the inca education system as teachers of religion tradition history and ethics. key concepts of andean thought are yanantin and masintin which involve a theory of complementary opposites that sees polarities such as male/female dark/light as interdependent parts of a harmonious whole.

although men have generally dominated philosophical discourse women philosophers have engaged in the discipline throughout history. ancient examples include hipparchia of maroneia active c. bce and arete of cyrene active thth centuries bce. some women philosophers were accepted during the medieval and modern eras but none became part of the western canon until the th and st century when many suggest that g.e.m. anscombe hannah arendt simone de beauvoir and susanne langer entered the canon.

in the early s some colleges and universities in the uk and us began admitting women producing more female academics. nevertheless u.s. department of education reports from the s indicate that few women ended up in philosophy and that philosophy is one of the least gender-proportionate fields in the humanities with women making up somewhere between % and % of philosophy faculty according to some studies.

philosophical questions can be grouped into various branches. these groupings allow philosophers to focus on a set of similar topics and interact with other thinkers who are interested in the same questions. the groupings also make philosophy easier for students to approach. students can learn the basic principles involved in one aspect of the field without being overwhelmed with the entire set of philosophical theories.

various sources present different categorical schemes. the categories adopted in this article aim for breadth and simplicity.

these five major branches can be separated into sub-branches and each sub-branch contains many specific fields of study

these divisions are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive. a philosopher might specialize in kantian epistemology or platonic aesthetics or modern political philosophy. furthermore these philosophical inquiries sometimes overlap with each other and with other inquiries such as science religion or mathematics.

dignaga founded a school of buddhist epistemology and logic.
epistemology is the branch of philosophy that studies knowledge. epistemologists examine putative sources of knowledge including perceptual experience reason memory and testimony. they also investigate questions about the nature of truth belief justification and rationality.

one of the most notable epistemological debates in the early modern period was between empiricism and rationalism. empiricism places emphasis on observational evidence via sensory experience as the source of knowledge. empiricism is associated with a posteriori knowledge which is obtained through experience such as scientific knowledge. rationalism places emphasis on reason as a source of knowledge. rationalism is associated with a priori knowledge which is independent of experience such as logic and mathematics.

philosophical skepticism which raises doubts some or all claims to knowledge has been a topic of interest throughout the history of philosophy. philosophical skepticism dates back thousands of years to ancient philosophers like pyrrho and features prominently in the works of modern philosophers ren descartes and david hume. skepticism has remained a central topic in contemporary epistemological debates.

one central debate in contemporary epistemology is about the conditions required for a belief to constitute knowledge which might include truth and justification. this debate was largely the result of attempts to solve the gettier problem. another common subject of contemporary debates is the regress problem which occurs when trying to offer proof or justification for any belief statement or proposition. the problem is that whatever the source of justification may be that source must either be without justification in which case it must be treated as an arbitrary foundation for belief or it must have some further justification in which case justification must either be the result of circular reasoning as in coherentism or the result of an infinite regress as in infinitism.

metaphysics is the study of the most general features of reality such as existence time objects and their properties wholes and their parts events processes and causation and the relationship between mind and body. metaphysics includes cosmology the study of the world in its entirety and ontology the study of being.

a major point of debate is between realism which holds that there are entities that exist independently of their mental perception and idealism which holds that reality is mentally constructed or otherwise immaterial. metaphysics deals with the topic of identity. essence is the set of attributes that make an object what it fundamentally is and without which it loses its identity while accident is a property that the object has without which the object can still retain its identity. particulars are objects that are said to exist in space and time as opposed to abstract objects such as numbers and universals which are properties held by multiple particulars such as redness or a gender. the type of existence if any of universals and abstract objects is an issue of debate.

several subfields of philosophy are closely related to epistemology and metaphysics most notably philosophy of mind and philosophy of language. all of these are sometimes grouped together as core fields in philosophy although this terminology is now considered outdated. philosophy of language explores the nature origins and use of language. philosophy of mind explores the nature of the mind and its relationship to the body as typified by disputes between materialism and dualism. in recent years this branch has become related to cognitive science.

value theory or axiology is the major branch of philosophy that addresses topics such as goodness beauty and justice. value theory includes ethics aesthetics political philosophy feminist philosophy philosophy of law and more.citation needed


the beijing imperial college was an intellectual center for confucian ethics and classics during the yuan ming and qing dynasties.
ethics also known as moral philosophy studies what constitutes good and bad conduct right and wrong values and good and evil. its primary investigations include how to live a good life and identifying standards of morality. it also includes investigating whether or not there is a best way to live or a universal moral standard and if so how we come to learn about it. the main branches of ethics are normative ethics meta-ethics and applied ethics.

the three main views in ethics about what constitute moral actions are

consequentialism which judges actions based on their consequences. one such view is utilitarianism which judges actions based on the net happiness or pleasure and/or lack of suffering or pain that they produce.
deontology which judges actions based on whether or not they are in accordance with ones moral duty. in the standard form defended by immanuel kant deontology is concerned with whether or not a choice respects the moral agency of other people regardless of its consequences.
virtue ethics which judges actions based on the moral character of the agent who performs them and whether they conform to what an ideally virtuous agent would do.
aesthetics
main article aesthetics
aesthetics is the critical reflection on art culture and nature. it addresses the nature of art beauty and taste enjoyment emotional values perception and with the creation and appreciation of beauty. it is more precisely defined as the study of sensory or sensori-emotional values sometimes called judgments of sentiment and taste. its major divisions are art theory literary theory film theory and music theory. an example from art theory is to discern the set of principles underlying the work of a particular artist or artistic movement such as the cubist aesthetic. the philosophy of film analyzes films and filmmakers for their philosophical content and explores film images cinema etc. as a medium for philosophical reflection and expression.citation needed

thomas hobbes best known for his leviathan which expounded an influential formulation of social contract theory.
political philosophy is the study of government and the relationship of individuals or families and clans to communities including the state.citation needed it includes questions about justice law property and the rights and obligations of the citizen. politics and ethics are traditionally linked subjects as both discuss the question of how people should live together.citation needed

philosophy of law aka jurisprudence explores the varying theories explaining the nature and interpretation of laws.
philosophy of education analyzes the definition and content of education as well as the goals and challenges of educators.
feminist philosophy explores questions surrounding gender sexuality and the body including the nature of feminism itself as a social and philosophical movement.
logic science and mathematics

this article may not properly summarize its corresponding main article. please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. june  learn how and when to remove this template message
the topics of philosophy of science are numbers symbols and the formal methods of reasoning as employed in the social sciences and natural sciences.citation needed

logic is the study of reasoning and argument. an argument is a connected series of statements intended to establish a proposition.citation needed the connected series of statements are premises and the proposition is the conclusion. for example

all humans are mortal. premise
socrates is a human. premise
therefore socrates is mortal. conclusion
deductive reasoning is when given certain premises conclusions are unavoidably implied. rules of inference are used to infer conclusions such as modus ponens where given a and if a then b then b must be concluded.

because sound reasoning is an essential element of all sciences social sciences and humanities disciplines logic became a formal science. sub-fields include mathematical logic philosophical logic modal logic computational logic and non-classical logics. a major question in the philosophy of mathematics is whether mathematical entities are objective and discovered called mathematical realism or invented called mathematical antirealism.


this branch explores the foundations methods history implications and purpose of science. many of its sub-divisions correspond to a specific branch of science. for example philosophy of biology deals specifically with the metaphysical epistemological and ethical issues in the biomedical and life sciences. the philosophy of mathematics studies the philosophical assumptions foundations and implications of mathematics.citation needed

some contemporary philosophers specialize in studying one or more historical periods. the history of philosophy study of a specific period individual or school should not be confused with the philosophy of history a minor subfield most commonly associated with historicism as first defended in hegels lectures on the philosophy of history.citation needed

philosophy of religion deals with questions that involve religion and religious ideas from a philosophically neutral perspective as opposed to theology which begins from religious convictions. traditionally religious questions were not seen as a separate field from philosophy proper the idea of a separate field only arose in the th century.xii

issues include the existence of god the relationship between reason and faith questions of religious epistemology the relationship between religion and science how to interpret religious experiences questions about the possibility of an afterlife the problem of religious language and the existence of souls and responses to religious pluralism and diversity.


metaphilosophy explores the aims of philosophy its boundaries and its methods.


a variety of other academic and non-academic approaches have been explored. the ideas conceived by a society have profound repercussions on what actions the society performs. weaver argued that ideas have consequences.

philosophy yields applications such as those in ethicsapplied ethics in particularand political philosophy. the political and economic philosophies of confucius sun tzu chanakya ibn khaldun ibn rushd ibn taymiyyah machiavelli leibniz hobbes locke rousseau adam smith john stuart mill marx tolstoy gandhi and martin luther king jr. have been used to shape and justify governments and their actions. progressive education as championed by dewey had a profound impact on th-century us educational practices. descendants of this movement include efforts in philosophy for children which are part of philosophy education. clausewitzs political philosophy of war has had a profound effect on statecraft international politics and military strategy in the th century especially around world war ii. logic is important in mathematics linguistics psychology computer science and computer engineering.

other important applications can be found in epistemology which aid in understanding the requisites for knowledge sound evidence and justified belief important in law economics decision theory and a number of other disciplines. the philosophy of science discusses the underpinnings of the scientific method and has affected the nature of scientific investigation and argumentation. philosophy thus has fundamental implications for science as a whole. for example the strictly empirical approach of b.f. skinners behaviorism affected for decades the approach of the american psychological establishment. deep ecology and animal rights examine the moral situation of humans as occupants of a world that has non-human occupants to consider also. aesthetics can help to interpret discussions of music literature the plastic arts and the whole artistic dimension of life. in general the various philosophies strive to provide practical activities with a deeper understanding of the theoretical or conceptual underpinnings of their fields.

the relationship between x and the philosophy of x is often intensely debated. richard feynman argued that the philosophy of a topic is irrelevant to its primary study saying that philosophy of science is as useful to scientists as ornithology is to birds.citation needed curtis white  by contrast argued that philosophical tools are essential to humanities sciences and social sciences.


main article contemporary philosophy  outside the profession
many inquiries outside of academia are philosophical in the broad sense. novelists playwrights filmmakers and musicians as well as scientists and others engage in recognizably philosophical activity.

some of those who study philosophy become professional philosophers typically by working as professors who teach research and write in academic institutions. however most students of academic philosophy later contribute to law journalism religion sciences politics business or various arts. for example public figures who have degrees in philosophy include comedians steve martin and ricky gervais filmmaker terrence malick pope john paul ii wikipedia co-founder larry sanger technology entrepreneur peter thiel supreme court justice stephen bryer and vice presidential candidate carly fiorina.

recent efforts to avail the general public to the work and relevance of philosophers include the million-dollar berggruen prize first awarded to charles taylor in .

germany was the first country to professionalize philosophy. the doctorate of philosophy phd developed in germany as the terminal teachers credential in the mid th century. at the end of  georg wilhelm friedrich hegel was the first philosopher to be appointed professor by the state namely by the prussian minister of education as an effect of napoleonic reform in prussia. in the united states the professionalization grew out of reforms to the american higher-education system largely based on the german model.


within the last century philosophy has increasingly become a professional discipline practiced within universities like other academic disciplines. accordingly it has become less general and more specialized. in the view of one prominent recent historian philosophy has become a highly organized discipline done by specialists primarily for other specialists. the number of philosophers has exploded the volume of publication has swelled and the subfields of serious philosophical investigation have multiplied. not only is the broad field of philosophy today far too vast to be embraced by one mind something similar is true even of many highly specialized subfields. some philosophers argue that this professionalization has negatively affected the discipline.

the end result of professionalization for philosophy has meant that work being done in the field is now almost exclusively done by university professors holding a doctorate in the field publishing in highly technical peer-reviewed journals. while it remains common among the population at large for a person to have a set of religious political or philosophical views that they consider their philosophy these views are rarely informed by or connected to the work being done in professional philosophy today. furthermore unlike many of the sciences for which there has come to be a healthy industry of books magazines and television shows meant to popularize science and communicate the technical results of a scientific field to the general populace works by professional philosophers directed at an audience outside the profession remain rare. philosopher michael sandels book justice whats the right thing to do and harry frankfurts on bullshit are examples of works that hold the uncommon distinction of having been written by professional philosophers but directed at and ultimately popular among a broader audience of non-philosophers. both works became new york times best sellers.


this article is about the usage of premise in discourse and logic. for other uses see premise disambiguation.
a premise or premissa is a statement that an argument claims will induce or justify a conclusion. it is an assumption that something is true.


in logic an argument requires a set of at least two declarative sentences or propositions known as the premises or premisses along with another declarative sentence or proposition known as the conclusion. this structure of two premises and one conclusion forms the basic argumentative structure. more complex arguments can use a sequence of rules to connect several premises to one conclusion or to derive a number of conclusions from the original premises which then act as premises for additional conclusions. an example of this is the use of the rules of inference found within symbolic logic.

aristotle held that any logical argument could be reduced to two premises and a conclusion. premises are sometimes left unstated in which case they are called missing premises for example

socrates is mortal because all men are mortal.

it is evident that a tacitly understood claim is that socrates is a man. the fully expressed reasoning is thus

because all men are mortal and socrates is a man socrates is mortal.

in this example the independent clauses preceding the comma namely all men are mortal and socrates is a man are the premises while socrates is mortal is the conclusion.

the proof of a conclusion depends on both the truth of the premises and the validity of the argument. also additional information is required over and above the meaning of the premise to determine if the full meaning of the conclusion coincides with what is.

for euclid premises constitute two of the three propositions in a syllogism with the other being the conclusion. these categorical propositions contain three terms subject and predicate of the conclusion and the middle term. the subject of the conclusion is called the minor term while the predicate is the major term. the premise that contains the middle term and major term is called the major premise while the premise that contains the middle term and minor term is called the minor premise.

a premise can also be an indicator word if statements have been combined into a logical argument and such word functions to mark the role of one or more of the statements. it indicates that the statement it is attached to is a premise.

 in general usage the spelling premise is most common; however in the field of logic the spelling premiss is often used especially among british writers.
references
 audi robert ed. . the cambridge dictionary of philosophy nd ed.. cambridge cambridge university press. p. . isbn ---x. argument a sequence of statements such that some of them the premises purport to give reasons to accept another of them the conclusion
 gullberg jan . mathematics  from the birth of numbers. new york w. w. norton & company. p. . isbn ---x.
 byrne patrick hugh . analysis and science in aristotle. new york state university of new york press. p. . isbn .
 ryan john . studies in philosophy and the history of philosophy volume . washington d.c. cua press. p. . isbn .
 potts robert . euclids elements of geometry book . london longman green longman roberts & green. p. .
 luckhardt c. grant; bechtel william . how to do things with logic. hillsdale nj lawrence erlbaum associates publishers. p. . isbn .

the hubble extreme deep field xdf was completed in september  and shows the farthest galaxies ever photographed. except for the few stars in the foreground which are bright and easily recognizable because only they have diffraction spikes every speck of light in the photo is an individual galaxy some of them as old as . billion years; the observable universe is estimated to contain more than  trillion galaxies.
cosmology from the greek  kosmos world and - -logia study of is a branch of astronomy concerned with the studies of the origin and evolution of the universe from the big bang to today and on into the future. it is the scientific study of the origin evolution and eventual fate of the universe. physical cosmology is the scientific study of the universes origin its large-scale structures and dynamics and its ultimate fate as well as the laws of science that govern these areas.

the term cosmology was first used in english in  in thomas blounts glossographia and in  taken up in latin by german philosopher christian wolff in cosmologia generalis.

religious or mythological cosmology is a body of beliefs based on mythological religious and esoteric literature and traditions of creation myths and eschatology.

physical cosmology is studied by scientists such as astronomers and physicists as well as philosophers such as metaphysicians philosophers of physics and philosophers of space and time. because of this shared scope with philosophy theories in physical cosmology may include both scientific and non-scientific propositions and may depend upon assumptions that cannot be tested. cosmology differs from astronomy in that the former is concerned with the universe as a whole while the latter deals with individual celestial objects. modern physical cosmology is dominated by the big bang theory which attempts to bring together observational astronomy and particle physics; more specifically a standard parameterization of the big bang with dark matter and dark energy known as the lambda-cdm model.

theoretical astrophysicist david n. spergel has described cosmology as a historical science because when we look out in space we look back in time due to the finite nature of the speed of light.


the image above contains clickable linkssee also human timeline and life timeline.
physics and astrophysics have played a central role in shaping the understanding of the universe through scientific observation and experiment. physical cosmology was shaped through both mathematics and observation in an analysis of the whole universe. the universe is generally understood to have begun with the big bang followed almost instantaneously by cosmic inflation; an expansion of space from which the universe is thought to have emerged .  . billion years ago. cosmogony studies the origin of the universe and cosmography maps the features of the universe.

in diderots encyclopdie cosmology is broken down into uranology the science of the heavens aerology the science of the air geology the science of the continents and hydrology the science of waters.

metaphysical cosmology has also been described as the placing of humans in the universe in relationship to all other entities. this is exemplified by marcus aureliuss observation that a mans place in that relationship he who does not know what the world is does not know where he is and he who does not know for what purpose the world exists does not know who he is nor what the world is.

physical cosmology is the branch of physics and astrophysics that deals with the study of the physical origins and evolution of the universe. it also includes the study of the nature of the universe on a large scale. in its earliest form it was what is now known as celestial mechanics the study of the heavens. greek philosophers aristarchus of samos aristotle and ptolemy proposed different cosmological theories. the geocentric ptolemaic system was the prevailing theory until the th century when nicolaus copernicus and subsequently johannes kepler and galileo galilei proposed a heliocentric system. this is one of the most famous examples of epistemological rupture in physical cosmology.


evidence of gravitational waves in the infant universe may have been uncovered by the microscopic examination of the focal plane of the bicep radio telescope.
isaac newtons principia mathematica published in  was the first description of the law of universal gravitation. it provided a physical mechanism for keplers laws and also allowed the anomalies in previous systems caused by gravitational interaction between the planets to be resolved. a fundamental difference between newtons cosmology and those preceding it was the copernican principlethat the bodies on earth obey the same physical laws as all the celestial bodies. this was a crucial philosophical advance in physical cosmology.

modern scientific cosmology is usually considered to have begun in  with albert einsteins publication of his final modification of general relativity in the paper cosmological considerations of the general theory of relativity although this paper was not widely available outside of germany until the end of world war i. general relativity prompted cosmogonists such as willem de sitter karl schwarzschild and arthur eddington to explore its astronomical ramifications which enhanced the ability of astronomers to study very distant objects. physicists began changing the assumption that the universe was static and unchanging. in  alexander friedmann introduced the idea of an expanding universe that contained moving matter. around the same time  to  the great debate took place with early cosmologists such as heber curtis and ernst pik determining that some nebulae seen in telescopes were separate galaxies far distant from our own.

in parallel to this dynamic approach to cosmology one long-standing debate about the structure of the cosmos was coming to a climax. mount wilson astronomer harlow shapley championed the model of a cosmos made up of the milky way star system only; while heber d. curtis argued for the idea that spiral nebulae were star systems in their own right as island universes. this difference of ideas came to a climax with the organization of the great debate on  april  at the meeting of the u.s. national academy of sciences in washington d.c. the debate was resolved when edwin hubble detected cepheid variables in the andromeda galaxy in  and . their distance established spiral nebulae well beyond the edge of the milky way.

subsequent modelling of the universe explored the possibility that the cosmological constant introduced by einstein in his  paper may result in an expanding universe depending on its value. thus the big bang model was proposed by the belgian priest georges lematre in  which was subsequently corroborated by edwin hubbles discovery of the redshift in  and later by the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation by arno penzias and robert woodrow wilson in . these findings were a first step to rule out some of many alternative cosmologies.

since around  several dramatic advances in observational cosmology have transformed cosmology from a largely speculative science into a predictive science with precise agreement between theory and observation. these advances include observations of the microwave background from the cobe wmap and planck satellites large new galaxy redshift surveys including dfgrs and sdss and observations of distant supernovae and gravitational lensing. these observations matched the predictions of the cosmic inflation theory a modified big bang theory and the specific version known as the lambda-cdm model. this has led many to refer to modern times as the golden age of cosmology.

on  march  astronomers at the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics announced the detection of gravitational waves providing strong evidence for inflation and the big bang. however on  june  lowered confidence in confirming the cosmic inflation findings was reported.

on  december  at the planck  meeting in ferrara italy astronomers reported that the universe is . billion years old and is composed of .% atomic matter .% dark matter and .% dark energy.


religious or mythological cosmology is a body of beliefs based on mythological religious and esoteric literature and traditions of creation and eschatology.

cosmology deals with the world as the totality of space time and all phenomena. historically it has had quite a broad scope and in many cases was founded in religion. in modern use metaphysical cosmology addresses questions about the universe which are beyond the scope of science. it is distinguished from religious cosmology in that it approaches these questions using philosophical methods like dialectics. modern metaphysical cosmology tries to address questions such as

what is the origin of the universe what is its first cause is its existence necessary see monism pantheism emanationism and creationism
what are the ultimate material components of the universe see mechanism dynamism hylomorphism atomism
what is the ultimate reason for the existence of the universe does the cosmos have a purpose see teleology
does the existence of consciousness have a purpose how do we know what we know about the totality of the cosmos does cosmological reasoning reveal metaphysical truths see epistemology
historical cosmologies
further information timeline of cosmological theories and nicolaus copernicus  copernican system

kinematic expansion without space expansion	rejects general relativity and the expanding space paradigm. gravity not included as initial assumption. obeys cosmological principle and special relativity; consists of a finite spherical cloud of particles or galaxies that expands within an infinite and otherwise empty flat space. it has a center and a cosmic edge surface of the particle cloud that expands at light speed. explanation of gravity was elaborate and unconvincing.
friedmannlematrerobertsonwalker class of models	howard robertson arthur walker 	uniformly expanding	class of universes that are homogeneous and isotropic. spacetime separates into uniformly curved space and cosmic time common to all co-moving observers. the formulation system is now known as the flrw or robertsonwalker metrics of cosmic time and curved space.
steady-state	hermann bondi thomas gold 	expanding steady state infinite	matter creation rate maintains constant density. continuous creation out of nothing from nowhere. exponential expansion. deceleration term q = .
steady-state	fred hoyle 	expanding steady state; but unstable	matter creation rate maintains constant density. but since matter creation rate must be exactly balanced with the space expansion rate the system is unstable.
ambiplasma	hannes alfvn  oskar klein	cellular universe expanding by means of matterantimatter annihilation	based on the concept of plasma cosmology. the universe is viewed as meta-galaxies divided by double layers and thus a bubble-like nature. other universes are formed from other bubbles. ongoing cosmic matter-antimatter annihilations keep the bubbles separated and moving apart preventing them from interacting.
bransdicke theory	carl h. brans robert h. dicke	expanding	based on machs principle. g varies with time as universe expands. but nobody is quite sure what machs principle actually means.citation needed
cosmic inflation	alan guth 	big bang modified to solve horizon and flatness problems	based on the concept of hot inflation. the universe is viewed as a multiple quantum flux  hence its bubble-like nature. other universes are formed from other bubbles. ongoing cosmic expansion kept the bubbles separated and moving apart.
eternal inflation a multiple universe model	andre linde 	big bang with cosmic inflation	multiverse based on the concept of cold inflation in which inflationary events occur at random each with independent initial conditions; some expand into bubble universes supposedly like our entire cosmos. bubbles nucleate in a spacetime foam.
cyclic model	paul steinhardt; neil turok 	expanding and contracting in cycles; m-theory.	two parallel orbifold planes or m-branes collide periodically in a higher-dimensional space. with quintessence or dark energy.
cyclic model	lauris baum; paul frampton 	solution of tolmans entropy problem	phantom dark energy fragments universe into large number of disconnected patches. our patch contracts containing only dark energy with zero entropy.
table notes the term static simply means not expanding and not contracting. symbol g represents newtons gravitational constant;  lambda is the cosmological constant.

in metaphysics a universal is what particular things have in common namely characteristics or qualities. in other words universals are repeatable or recurrent entities that can be instantiated or exemplified by many particular things. for example suppose there are two chairs in a room each of which is green. these two chairs both share the quality of chairness as well as greenness or the quality of being green; in other words they share a universal. there are three major kinds of qualities or characteristics types or kinds e.g. mammal properties e.g. short strong and relations e.g. father of next to. these are all different types of universals.

paradigmatically universals are abstract e.g. humanity whereas particulars are concrete e.g. the personhood of socrates. however universals are not necessarily abstract and particulars are not necessarily concrete. for example one might hold that numbers are particular yet abstract objects. likewise some philosophers such as d. m. armstrong consider universals to be concrete.

most do not consider classes to be universals although some prominent philosophers do as john bigelow.


the history of any creation went through a process of qualifications meeting dependancies of that type thing including all parts put together to make it an accepted thing of its particular type. a chair must first exist upon a surface with the force of gravity upon it. the chair must be upon something solid and it must provide a platform for something to sit upon. any other universals for chairness must qualify the particular dependencies set forth by authority. the first chair qualified itself as a chair from its propriety. universals exist in every created thing but only in the individual subparts themselves not in the whole thing itself. universals can be thought of as an evolution of a creations life constantly on a journey towards perfection.


the problem of universals is an ancient problem in metaphysics about whether universals exist. the problem arises from attempts to account for the phenomenon of similarity or attribute agreement among things. for example grass and granny smith apples are similar or agree in attribute namely in having the attribute of greenness. the issue is how to account for this sort of agreement in attribute among things.

there are many philosophical positions regarding universals. taking beauty as an example three positions are

idealism or conceptualism beauty is a property constructed in the mind so it exists only in descriptions of things.
platonic realism beauty is a property that exists in an ideal form independently of any mind or thing.
aristotelian realism beauty is a property that only exists when beautiful things exist.
taking a broader view the main positions are generally considered classifiable as realism nominalism and idealism sometimes simply named anti-realism with regard to universals. realists posit the existence of independent abstract universals to account for attribute agreement. nominalists deny that universals exist claiming that they are not necessary to explain attribute agreement. conceptualists posit that universals exist only in the mind or when conceptualized denying the independent existence of universals. complications which arise include the implications of language use and the complexity of relating language to ontology.

a universal may have instances known as its particulars. for example the type dog or doghood is a universal as are the property red or redness and the relation betweenness or being between. any particular dog red thing or object that is between other things is not a universal however but is an instance of a universal. that is a universal type doghood property redness or relation betweenness inheres in a particular object a specific dog red thing or object between other things.


platonic realism holds universals to be the referents of general terms such as the abstract nonphysical non-mental entities to which words such as sameness circularity and beauty refer. particulars are the referents of proper names such as phaedo or of definite descriptions that identify single objects such as the phrase that bed over there. other metaphysical theories may use the terminology of universals to describe physical entities.

platos examples of what we might today call universals included mathematical and geometrical ideas such as a circle and natural numbers as universals. platos views on universals did however vary across several different discussions. in some cases plato spoke as if the perfect circle functioned as the form or blueprint for all copies and for the word definition of circle. in other discussions plato describes particulars as participating in the associated universal.

contemporary realists agree with the thesis that universals are multiply-exemplifiable entities. examples include by d. m. armstrong nicholas wolterstorff reinhardt grossmann michael loux.

nominalists hold that universals are not real mind-independent entities but either merely concepts sometimes called conceptualism or merely names. nominalists typically argue that properties are abstract particulars like tropes rather than universals. jp moreland distinguishes between extreme and moderate nominalism. examples of nominalists include the medieval philosophers roscelin of compigne and william of ockham and contemporary philosophers w. v. o. quine wilfred sellars d. c. williams and keith campbell.


the ness-ity-hood principle is used mainly by english-speaking philosophers to generate convenient concise names for universals or properties. according to the ness-ity-hood principle a name for any universal may be formed that is distinctive of left-handers may be formed by taking the predicate left-handed and adding ness which yields the name left-handedness. the principle is most helpful in cases where there is not an established or standard name of the universal in ordinary english usage what is the name of the universal distinctive of chairs chair in english is used not only as a subject as in the chair is broken but also as a predicate as in that is a chair. so to generate a name for the universal distinctive of chairs take the predicate chair and add ness which yields chairness.

memory is the faculty of the brain by which data or information is encoded stored and retrieved when needed. it is the retention of information over time for the purpose of influencing future action. if past events could not be remembered it would be impossible for language relationships or personal identity to develop. memory loss is usually described as forgetfulness or amnesia.

memory is often understood as an informational processing system with explicit and implicit functioning that is made up of a sensory processor short-term or working memory and long-term memory. this can be related to the neuron. the sensory processor allows information from the outside world to be sensed in the form of chemical and physical stimuli and attended to various levels of focus and intent. working memory serves as an encoding and retrieval processor. information in the form of stimuli is encoded in accordance with explicit or implicit functions by the working memory processor. the working memory also retrieves information from previously stored material. finally the function of long-term memory is to store data through various categorical models or systems.

declarative or explicit memory is the conscious storage and recollection of data. under declarative memory resides semantic and episodic memory. semantic memory refers to memory that is encoded with specific meaning while episodic memory refers to information that is encoded along a spatial and temporal plane. declarative memory is usually the primary process thought of when referencing memory. non-declarative or implicit memory is the unconscious storage and recollection of information. an example of a non-declarative process would be the unconscious learning or retrieval of information by way of procedural memory or a priming phenomenon. priming is the process of subliminally arousing specific responses from memory and shows that not all memory is consciously activated whereas procedural memory is the slow and gradual learning of skills that often occurs without conscious attention to learning.

memory is not a perfect processor and is affected by many factors. the ways by which information is encoded stored and retrieved can all be corrupted. the amount of attention given new stimuli can diminish the amount of information that becomes encoded for storage. also the storage process can become corrupted by physical damage to areas of the brain that are associated with memory storage such as the hippocampus. finally the retrieval of information from long-term memory can be disrupted because of decay within long-term memory. normal functioning decay over time and brain damage all affect the accuracy and capacity of the memory.



sensory memory holds information derived from the senses less than one second after an item is perceived. the ability to look at an item and remember what it looked like with just a split second of observation or memorization is the example of sensory memory. it is out of cognitive control and is an automatic response. with very short presentations participants often report that they seem to see more than they can actually report. the first experiments exploring this form of sensory memory were precisely conducted by george sperling  using the partial report paradigm. subjects were presented with a grid of  letters arranged into three rows of four. after a brief presentation subjects were then played either a high medium or low tone cuing them which of the rows to report. based on these partial report experiments sperling was able to show that the capacity of sensory memory was approximately  items but that it degraded very quickly within a few hundred milliseconds. because this form of memory degrades so quickly participants would see the display but be unable to report all of the items  in the whole report procedure before they decayed. this type of memory cannot be prolonged via rehearsal.

three types of sensory memories exist. iconic memory is a fast decaying store of visual information a type of sensory memory that briefly stores an image that has been perceived for a small duration. echoic memory is a fast decaying store of auditory information also a sensory memory that briefly stores sounds that have been perceived for short durations. haptic memory is a type of sensory memory that represents a database for touch stimuli.


short-term memory is also known as working memory. short-term memory allows recall for a period of several seconds to a minute without rehearsal. its capacity however is very limited. in  george a. miller - when working at bell laboratories conducted experiments showing that the store of short-term memory was  items. hence the title of his famous paper the magical number . modern estimates of the capacity of short-term memory are lower typically of the order of  items; however memory capacity can be increased through a process called chunking. for example in recalling a ten-digit telephone number a person could chunk the digits into three groups first the area code such as  then a three-digit chunk  and last a four-digit chunk . this method of remembering telephone numbers is far more effective than attempting to remember a string of  digits; this is because we are able to chunk the information into meaningful groups of numbers. this is reflected in some countries tendencies to display telephone numbers as several chunks of two to four numbers.

short-term memory is believed to rely mostly on an acoustic code for storing information and to a lesser extent on a visual code. conrad  found that test subjects had more difficulty recalling collections of letters that were acoustically similar e.g. e p d. confusion with recalling acoustically similar letters rather than visually similar letters implies that the letters were encoded acoustically. conrads  study however deals with the encoding of written text; thus while memory of written language may rely on acoustic components generalizations to all forms of memory cannot be made.



olin levi warner memory . library of congress thomas jefferson building washington d.c.
the storage in sensory memory and short-term memory generally has a strictly limited capacity and duration which means that information is not retained indefinitely. by contrast long-term memory can store much larger quantities of information for potentially unlimited duration sometimes a whole life span. its capacity is immeasurable. for example given a random seven-digit number one may remember it for only a few seconds before forgetting suggesting it was stored in short-term memory. on the other hand one can remember telephone numbers for many years through repetition; this information is said to be stored in long-term memory.

while short-term memory encodes information acoustically long-term memory encodes it semantically baddeley  discovered that after  minutes test subjects had the most difficulty recalling a collection of words that had similar meanings e.g. big large great huge long-term. another part of long-term memory is episodic memory which attempts to capture information such as what when and where. with episodic memory individuals are able to recall specific events such as birthday parties and weddings.

short-term memory is supported by transient patterns of neuronal communication dependent on regions of the frontal lobe especially dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the parietal lobe. long-term memory on the other hand is maintained by more stable and permanent changes in neural connections widely spread throughout the brain. the hippocampus is essential for learning new information to the consolidation of information from short-term to long-term memory although it does not seem to store information itself. it was thought that without the hippocampus new memories were unable to be stored into long-term memory and that there would be a very short attention span as first gleaned from patient henry molaison after what was thought to be the full removal of both his hippocampi. more recent examination of his brain post-mortem shows that the hippocampus was more intact than first thought throwing theories drawn from the initial data into question. the hippocampus may be involved in changing neural connections for a period of three months or more after the initial learning.

research has suggested that long-term memory storage in humans may be maintained by dna methylation and the prion gene.

the multi-store model also known as atkinsonshiffrin memory model was first described in  by atkinson and shiffrin.

the multi-store model has been criticised for being too simplistic. for instance long-term memory is believed to be actually made up of multiple subcomponents such as episodic and procedural memory. it also proposes that rehearsal is the only mechanism by which information eventually reaches long-term storage but evidence shows us capable of remembering things without rehearsal.

the model also shows all the memory stores as being a single unit whereas research into this shows differently. for example short-term memory can be broken up into different units such as visual information and acoustic information. in a study by zlonoga and gerber  patient kf demonstrated certain deviations from the atkinsonshiffrin model. patient kf was brain damaged displaying difficulties regarding short-term memory. recognition of sounds such as spoken numbers letters words and easily identifiable noises such as doorbells and cats meowing were all impacted. visual short-term memory was unaffected suggesting a dichotomy between visual and audial memory.


in  baddeley and hitch proposed a working memory model that replaced the general concept of short-term memory with an active maintenance of information in the short-term storage. in this model working memory consists of three basic stores the central executive the phonological loop and the visuo-spatial sketchpad. in  this model was expanded with the multimodal episodic buffer baddeleys model of working memory.

the central executive essentially acts as an attention sensory store. it channels information to the three component processes the phonological loop the visuo-spatial sketchpad and the episodic buffer.

the phonological loop stores auditory information by silently rehearsing sounds or words in a continuous loop the articulatory process for example the repetition of a telephone number over and over again. a short list of data is easier to remember.

the visuospatial sketchpad stores visual and spatial information. it is engaged when performing spatial tasks such as judging distances or visual ones such as counting the windows on a house or imagining images.

the episodic buffer is dedicated to linking information across domains to form integrated units of visual spatial and verbal information and chronological ordering e.g. the memory of a story or a movie scene. the episodic buffer is also assumed to have links to long-term memory and semantical meaning.

the working memory model explains many practical observations such as why it is easier to do two different tasks one verbal and one visual than two similar tasks e.g. two visual and the aforementioned word-length effect. working memory is also the premise for what allows us to do everyday activities involving thought. it is the section of memory where we carry out thought processes and use them to learn and reason about topics.


researchers distinguish between recognition and recall memory. recognition memory tasks require individuals to indicate whether they have encountered a stimulus such as a picture or a word before. recall memory tasks require participants to retrieve previously learned information. for example individuals might be asked to produce a series of actions they have seen before or to say a list of words they have heard before.


topographic memory involves the ability to orient oneself in space to recognize and follow an itinerary or to recognize familiar places. getting lost when traveling alone is an example of the failure of topographic memory.

flashbulb memories are clear episodic memories of unique and highly emotional events. people remembering where they were or what they were doing when they first heard the news of president kennedys assassination the sydney siege or of / are examples of flashbulb memories.

anderson  divides long-term memory into declarative explicit and procedural implicit memories.

declarative memory requires conscious recall in that some conscious process must call back the information. it is sometimes called explicit memory since it consists of information that is explicitly stored and retrieved.

declarative memory can be further sub-divided into semantic memory concerning principles and facts taken independent of context; and episodic memory concerning information specific to a particular context such as a time and place. semantic memory allows the encoding of abstract knowledge about the world such as paris is the capital of france. episodic memory on the other hand is used for more personal memories such as the sensations emotions and personal associations of a particular place or time. episodic memories often reflect the firsts in life such as a first kiss first day of school or first time winning a championship. these are key events in ones life that can be remembered clearly. research suggests that declarative memory is supported by several functions of the medial temporal lobe system which includes the hippocampus. autobiographical memory  memory for particular events within ones own life  is generally viewed as either equivalent to or a subset of episodic memory. visual memory is part of memory preserving some characteristics of our senses pertaining to visual experience. one is able to place in memory information that resembles objects places animals or people in sort of a mental image. visual memory can result in priming and it is assumed some kind of perceptual representational system underlies this phenomenon.


in contrast procedural memory or implicit memory is not based on the conscious recall of information but on implicit learning. it can best be summarized as remembering how to do something. procedural memory is primarily used in learning motor skills and can be considered a subset of implicit memory. it is revealed when one does better in a given task due only to repetition  no new explicit memories have been formed but one is unconsciously accessing aspects of those previous experiences. procedural memory involved in motor learning depends on the cerebellum and basal ganglia.

a characteristic of procedural memory is that the things remembered are automatically translated into actions and thus sometimes difficult to describe. some examples of procedural memory include the ability to ride a bike or tie shoelaces.


another major way to distinguish different memory functions is whether the content to be remembered is in the past retrospective memory or in the future prospective memory. thus retrospective memory as a category includes semantic episodic and autobiographical memory. in contrast prospective memory is memory for future intentions or remembering to remember winograd . prospective memory can be further broken down into event- and time-based prospective remembering. time-based prospective memories are triggered by a time-cue such as going to the doctor action at pm cue. event-based prospective memories are intentions triggered by cues such as remembering to post a letter action after seeing a mailbox cue. cues do not need to be related to the action as the mailbox/letter example and lists sticky-notes knotted handkerchiefs or string around the finger all exemplify cues that people use as strategies to enhance prospective memory.


infants do not have the language ability to report on their memories and so verbal reports cannot be used to assess very young childrens memory. throughout the years however researchers have adapted and developed a number of measures for assessing both infants recognition memory and their recall memory. habituation and operant conditioning techniques have been used to assess infants recognition memory and the deferred and elicited imitation techniques have been used to assess infants recall memory.

techniques used to assess infants recognition memory include the following

visual paired comparison procedure relies on habituation infants are first presented with pairs of visual stimuli such as two black-and-white photos of human faces for a fixed amount of time; then after being familiarized with the two photos they are presented with the familiar photo and a new photo. the time spent looking at each photo is recorded. looking longer at the new photo indicates that they remember the familiar one. studies using this procedure have found that - to -month-olds can retain information for as long as fourteen days.
operant conditioning technique infants are placed in a crib and a ribbon that is connected to a mobile overhead is tied to one of their feet. infants notice that when they kick their foot the mobile moves  the rate of kicking increases dramatically within minutes. studies using this technique have revealed that infants memory substantially improves over the first -months. whereas - to -month-olds can retain an operant response such as activating the mobile by kicking their foot for a week -month-olds can retain it for two weeks and -month-olds can retain a similar operant response for as long as  weeks.
techniques used to assess infants recall memory include the following

deferred imitation technique an experimenter shows infants a unique sequence of actions such as using a stick to push a button on a box and then after a delay asks the infants to imitate the actions. studies using deferred imitation have shown that -month-olds memories for the sequence of actions can last for as long as four months.
elicited imitation technique is very similar to the deferred imitation technique; the difference is that infants are allowed to imitate the actions before the delay. studies using the elicited imitation technique have shown that -month-olds can recall the action sequences twelve months later.
to assess children and older adults
researchers use a variety of tasks to assess older children and adults memory. some examples are

paired associate learning  when one learns to associate one specific word with another. for example when given a word such as safe one must learn to say another specific word such as green. this is stimulus and response.
free recall  during this task a subject would be asked to study a list of words and then later they will be asked to recall or write down as many words that they can remember similar to free response questions. earlier items are affected by retroactive interference ri which means the longer the list the greater the interference and the less likelihood that they are recalled. on the other hand items that have been presented lastly suffer little ri but suffer a great deal from proactive interference pi which means the longer the delay in recall the more likely that the items will be lost.
cued recall  one is given a significant hints to help retrieve information that has been previously encoded into the persons memory; typically this can involve a word relating to the information being asked to remember. this is similar to fill in the blank assessments used in classrooms.
recognition  subjects are asked to remember a list of words or pictures after which point they are asked to identify the previously presented words or pictures from among a list of alternatives that were not presented in the original list. this is similar to multiple choice assessments.
detection paradigm  individuals are shown a number of objects and color samples during a certain period of time. they are then tested on their visual ability to remember as much as they can by looking at testers and pointing out whether the testers are similar to the sample or if any change is present.
savings method  compares the speed of originally learning to the speed of relearning it. the amount of time saved measures memory.
implicit-memory tasks  information is drawn from memory without conscious realization.
failures


transience  memories degrade with the passing of time. this occurs in the storage stage of memory after the information has been stored and before it is retrieved. this can happen in sensory short-term and long-term storage. it follows a general pattern where the information is rapidly forgotten during the first couple of days or years followed by small losses in later days or years.
absent-mindedness  memory failure due to the lack of attention. attention plays a key role in storing information into long-term memory; without proper attention the information might not be stored making it impossible to be retrieved later.

brain areas involved in the neuroanatomy of memory such as the hippocampus the amygdala the striatum or the mammillary bodies are thought to be involved in specific types of memory. for example the hippocampus is believed to be involved in spatial learning and declarative learning while the amygdala is thought to be involved in emotional memory.

damage to certain areas in patients and animal models and subsequent memory deficits is a primary source of information. however rather than implicating a specific area it could be that damage to adjacent areas or to a pathway traveling through the area is actually responsible for the observed deficit. further it is not sufficient to describe memory and its counterpart learning as solely dependent on specific brain regions. learning and memory are usually attributed to changes in neuronal synapses thought to be mediated by long-term potentiation and long-term depression. however this has been questioned on computational as well as neurophysiological grounds by the cognitive scientist charles r. gallistel and others.

in general the more emotionally charged an event or experience is the better it is remembered; this phenomenon is known as the memory enhancement effect. patients with amygdala damage however do not show a memory enhancement effect.

hebb distinguished between short-term and long-term memory. he postulated that any memory that stayed in short-term storage for a long enough time would be consolidated into a long-term memory. later research showed this to be false. research has shown that direct injections of cortisol or epinephrine help the storage of recent experiences. this is also true for stimulation of the amygdala. this proves that excitement enhances memory by the stimulation of hormones that affect the amygdala. excessive or prolonged stress with prolonged cortisol may hurt memory storage. patients with amygdalar damage are no more likely to remember emotionally charged words than nonemotionally charged ones. the hippocampus is important for explicit memory. the hippocampus is also important for memory consolidation. the hippocampus receives input from different parts of the cortex and sends its output out to different parts of the brain also. the input comes from secondary and tertiary sensory areas that have processed the information a lot already. hippocampal damage may also cause memory loss and problems with memory storage. this memory loss includes retrograde amnesia which is the loss of memory for events that occurred shortly before the time of brain damage.


cognitive neuroscientists consider memory as the retention reactivation and reconstruction of the experience-independent internal representation. the term of internal representation implies that such a definition of memory contains two components the expression of memory at the behavioral or conscious level and the underpinning physical neural changes dudai . the latter component is also called engram or memory traces semon . some neuroscientists and psychologists mistakenly equate the concept of engram and memory broadly conceiving all persisting after-effects of experiences as memory; others argue against this notion that memory does not exist until it is revealed in behavior or thought moscovitch .

one question that is crucial in cognitive neuroscience is how information and mental experiences are coded and represented in the brain. scientists have gained much knowledge about the neuronal codes from the studies of plasticity but most of such research has been focused on simple learning in simple neuronal circuits; it is considerably less clear about the neuronal changes involved in more complex examples of memory particularly declarative memory that requires the storage of facts and events byrne . convergence-divergence zones might be the neural networks where memories are stored and retrieved. considering that there are several kinds of memory depending on types of represented knowledge underlying mechanisms processes functions and modes of acquisition it is likely that different brain areas support different memory systems and that they are in mutual relationships in neuronal networks components of memory representation are distributed widely across different parts of the brain as mediated by multiple neocortical circuits.

encoding. encoding of working memory involves the spiking of individual neurons induced by sensory input which persists even after the sensory input disappears jensen and lisman ; fransen et al. . encoding of episodic memory involves persistent changes in molecular structures that alter synaptic transmission between neurons. examples of such structural changes include long-term potentiation ltp or spike-timing-dependent plasticity stdp. the persistent spiking in working memory can enhance the synaptic and cellular changes in the encoding of episodic memory jensen and lisman .
working memory. recent functional imaging studies detected working memory signals in both medial temporal lobe mtl a brain area strongly associated with long-term memory and prefrontal cortex ranganath et al.  suggesting a strong relationship between working memory and long-term memory. however the substantially more working memory signals seen in the prefrontal lobe suggest that this area play a more important role in working memory than mtl suzuki .
consolidation and reconsolidation. short-term memory stm is temporary and subject to disruption while long-term memory ltm once consolidated is persistent and stable. consolidation of stm into ltm at the molecular level presumably involves two processes synaptic consolidation and system consolidation. the former involves a protein synthesis process in the medial temporal lobe mtl whereas the latter transforms the mtl-dependent memory into an mtl-independent memory over months to years ledoux . in recent years such traditional consolidation dogma has been re-evaluated as a result of the studies on reconsolidation. these studies showed that prevention after retrieval affects subsequent retrieval of the memory sara . new studies have shown that post-retrieval treatment with protein synthesis inhibitors and many other compounds can lead to an amnestic state nadel et al. b; alberini ; dudai . these findings on reconsolidation fit with the behavioral evidence that retrieved memory is not a carbon copy of the initial experiences and memories are updated during retrieval.

study of the genetics of human memory is in its infancy though many genes have been investigated for their association to memory in humans and non-human animals. a notable initial success was the association of apoe with memory dysfunction in alzheimers disease. the search for genes associated with normally varying memory continues. one of the first candidates for normal variation in memory is the protein kibra which appears to be associated with the rate at which material is forgotten over a delay period. there has been some evidence that memories are stored in the nucleus of neurons.non-primary source needed


several genes proteins and enzymes have been extensively researched for their association with memory. long-term memory unlike short-term memory is dependent upon the synthesis of new proteins. this occurs within the cellular body and concerns the particular transmitters receptors and new synapse pathways that reinforce the communicative strength between neurons. the production of new proteins devoted to synapse reinforcement is triggered after the release of certain signaling substances such as calcium within hippocampal neurons in the cell. in the case of hippocampal cells this release is dependent upon the expulsion of magnesium a binding molecule that is expelled after significant and repetitive synaptic signaling. the temporary expulsion of magnesium frees nmda receptors to release calcium in the cell a signal that leads to gene transcription and the construction of reinforcing proteins. for more information see long-term potentiation ltp.

one of the newly synthesized proteins in ltp is also critical for maintaining long-term memory. this protein is an autonomously active form of the enzyme protein kinase c pkc known as pkm. pkm maintains the activity-dependent enhancement of synaptic strength and inhibiting pkm erases established long-term memories without affecting short-term memory or once the inhibitor is eliminated the ability to encode and store new long-term memories is restored. also bdnf is important for the persistence of long-term memories.

the long-term stabilization of synaptic changes is also determined by a parallel increase of pre- and postsynaptic structures such as axonal bouton dendritic spine and postsynaptic density. on the molecular level an increase of the postsynaptic scaffolding proteins psd- and homerc has been shown to correlate with the stabilization of synaptic enlargement. the camp response element-binding protein creb is a transcription factor which is believed to be important in consolidating short-term to long-term memories and which is believed to be downregulated in alzheimers disease.


rats exposed to an intense learning event may retain a life-long memory of the event even after a single training session. the long-term memory of such an event appears to be initially stored in the hippocampus but this storage is transient. much of the long-term storage of the memory seems to take place in the anterior cingulate cortex. when such an exposure was experimentally applied more than  differently methylated dna regions appeared in the hippocampus neuronal genome of the rats at one and at  hours after training. these alterations in methylation pattern occurred at many genes that were down-regulated often due to the formation of new -methylcytosine sites in cpg rich regions of the genome. furthermore many other genes were upregulated likely often due to hypomethylation. hypomethylation often results from the removal of methyl groups from previously existing -methylcytosines in dna. demethylation is carried out by several proteins acting in concert including the tet enzymes as well as enzymes of the dna base excision repair pathway see epigenetics in learning and memory. the pattern of induced and repressed genes in brain neurons subsequent to an intense learning event likely provides the molecular basis for a long-term memory of the event.


main article epigenetics in learning and memory
studies of the molecular basis for memory formation indicate that epigenetic mechanisms operating in brain neurons play a central role in determining this capability. key epigenetic mechanisms involved in memory include the methylation and demethylation of neuronal dna as well as modifications of histone proteins including methylations acetylations and deacetylations.

stimulation of brain activity in memory formation is often accompanied by the generation of damage in neuronal dna that is followed by repair associated with persistent epigenetic alterations. in particular the dna repair processes of non-homologous end joining and base excision repair are employed in memory formation.citation needed


for the inability of adults to retrieve early memories see childhood amnesia.
up until the mid-s it was assumed that infants could not encode retain and retrieve information. a growing body of research now indicates that infants as young as -months can recall information after a -hour delay. furthermore research has revealed that as infants grow older they can store information for longer periods of time; -month-olds can recall information after a -hour period -month-olds after up to five weeks and -month-olds after as long as twelve months. in addition studies have shown that with age infants can store information faster. whereas -month-olds can recall a three-step sequence after being exposed to it once -month-olds need approximately six exposures in order to be able to remember it.

although -month-olds can recall information over the short-term they have difficulty recalling the temporal order of information. it is only by  months of age that infants can recall the actions of a two-step sequence in the correct temporal order  that is recalling step  and then step . in other words when asked to imitate a two-step action sequence such as putting a toy car in the base and pushing in the plunger to make the toy roll to the other end -month-olds tend to imitate the actions of the sequence in the correct order step  and then step . younger infants -month-olds can only recall one step of a two-step sequence. researchers have suggested that these age differences are probably due to the fact that the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the frontal components of the neural network are not fully developed at the age of -months.

in fact the term infantile amnesia refers to the phenomenon of accelerated forgetting during infancy. importantly infantile amnesia is not unique to humans and preclinical research using rodent models provides insight into the precise neurobiology of this phenomenon. a review of the literature from behavioral neuroscientist dr jee hyun kim suggests that accelerated forgetting during early life is at least partly due to rapid growth of the brain during this period.


one of the key concerns of older adults is the experience of memory loss especially as it is one of the hallmark symptoms of alzheimers disease. however memory loss is qualitatively different in normal aging from the kind of memory loss associated with a diagnosis of alzheimers budson & price . research has revealed that individuals performance on memory tasks that rely on frontal regions declines with age. older adults tend to exhibit deficits on tasks that involve knowing the temporal order in which they learned information; source memory tasks that require them to remember the specific circumstances or context in which they learned information; and prospective memory tasks that involve remembering to perform an act at a future time. older adults can manage their problems with prospective memory by using appointment books for example.

gene transcription profiles were determined for the human frontal cortex of individuals from age  to  years. numerous genes were identified with reduced expression after age  and especially after age . genes that play central roles in memory and learning were among those showing the most significant reduction with age. there was also a marked increase in dna damage likely oxidative damage in the promoters of those genes with reduced expression. it was suggested that dna damage may reduce the expression of selectively vulnerable genes involved in memory and learning.


much of the current knowledge of memory has come from studying memory disorders particularly amnesia. loss of memory is known as amnesia. amnesia can result from extensive damage to a the regions of the medial temporal lobe such as the hippocampus dentate gyrus subiculum amygdala the parahippocampal entorhinal and perirhinal cortices or the b midline diencephalic region specifically the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus and the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. there are many sorts of amnesia and by studying their different forms it has become possible to observe apparent defects in individual sub-systems of the brains memory systems and thus hypothesize their function in the normally working brain. other neurological disorders such as alzheimers disease and parkinsons disease can also affect memory and cognition. hyperthymesia or hyperthymesic syndrome is a disorder that affects an individuals autobiographical memory essentially meaning that they cannot forget small details that otherwise would not be stored. korsakoffs syndrome also known as korsakoffs psychosis amnesic-confabulatory syndrome is an organic brain disease that adversely affects memory by widespread loss or shrinkage of neurons within the prefrontal cortex.

while not a disorder a common temporary failure of word retrieval from memory is the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon. sufferers of anomic aphasia also called nominal aphasia or anomia however do experience the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon on an ongoing basis due to damage to the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain.


interference can hamper memorization and retrieval. there is retroactive interference when learning new information makes it harder to recall old information and proactive interference where prior learning disrupts recall of new information. although interference can lead to forgetting it is important to keep in mind that there are situations when old information can facilitate learning of new information. knowing latin for instance can help an individual learn a related language such as french  this phenomenon is known as positive transfer.


stress has a significant effect on memory formation and learning. in response to stressful situations the brain releases hormones and neurotransmitters ex. glucocorticoids and catecholamines which affect memory encoding processes in the hippocampus. behavioural research on animals shows that chronic stress produces adrenal hormones which impact the hippocampal structure in the brains of rats. an experimental study by german cognitive psychologists l. schwabe and o. wolf demonstrates how learning under stress also decreases memory recall in humans. in this study  healthy female and male university students participated in either a stress test or a control group. those randomly assigned to the stress test group had a hand immersed in ice cold water the reputable secpt or socially evaluated cold pressor test for up to three minutes while being monitored and videotaped. both the stress and control groups were then presented with  words to memorize. twenty-four hours later both groups were tested to see how many words they could remember free recall as well as how many they could recognize from a larger list of words recognition performance. the results showed a clear impairment of memory performance in the stress test group who recalled % fewer words than the control group. the researchers suggest that stress experienced during learning distracts people by diverting their attention during the memory encoding process.

however memory performance can be enhanced when material is linked to the learning context even when learning occurs under stress. a separate study by cognitive psychologists schwabe and wolf shows that when retention testing is done in a context similar to or congruent with the original learning task i.e. in the same room memory impairment and the detrimental effects of stress on learning can be attenuated. seventy-two healthy female and male university students randomly assigned to the secpt stress test or to a control group were asked to remember the locations of  pairs of picture cards  a computerized version of the card game concentration or memory. the room in which the experiment took place was infused with the scent of vanilla as odour is a strong cue for memory. retention testing took place the following day either in the same room with the vanilla scent again present or in a different room without the fragrance. the memory performance of subjects who experienced stress during the object-location task decreased significantly when they were tested in an unfamiliar room without the vanilla scent an incongruent context; however the memory performance of stressed subjects showed no impairment when they were tested in the original room with the vanilla scent a congruent context. all participants in the experiment both stressed and unstressed performed faster when the learning and retrieval contexts were similar.

this research on the effects of stress on memory may have practical implications for education for eyewitness testimony and for psychotherapy students may perform better when tested in their regular classroom rather than an exam room eyewitnesses may recall details better at the scene of an event than in a courtroom and persons suffering from post-traumatic stress may improve when helped to situate their memories of a traumatic event in an appropriate context.

stressful life experiences may be a cause of memory loss as a person ages. glucocorticoids that are released during stress damage neurons that are located in the hippocampal region of the brain. therefore the more stressful situations that someone encounters the more susceptible they are to memory loss later on. the ca neurons found in the hippocampus are destroyed due to glucocorticoids decreasing the release of glucose and the reuptake of glutamate. this high level of extracellular glutamate allows calcium to enter nmda receptors which in return kills neurons. stressful life experiences can also cause repression of memories where a person moves an unbearable memory to the unconscious mind. this directly relates to traumatic events in ones past such as kidnappings being prisoners of war or sexual abuse as a child.

the more long term the exposure to stress is the more impact it may have. however short term exposure to stress also causes impairment in memory by interfering with the function of the hippocampus. research shows that subjects placed in a stressful situation for a short amount of time still have blood glucocorticoid levels that have increased drastically when measured after the exposure is completed. when subjects are asked to complete a learning task after short term exposure they often have difficulties. prenatal stress also hinders the ability to learn and memorize by disrupting the development of the hippocampus and can lead to unestablished long term potentiation in the offspring of severely stressed parents. although the stress is applied prenatally the offspring show increased levels of glucocorticoids when they are subjected to stress later on in life.


making memories occurs through a three-step process which can be enhanced by sleep. the three steps are as follows

acquisition which is the process of storage and retrieval of new information in memory

sleep affects memory consolidation. during sleep the neural connections in the brain are strengthened. this enhances the brains abilities to stabilize and retain memories. there have been several studies which show that sleep improves the retention of memory as memories are enhanced through active consolidation. system consolidation takes place during slow-wave sleep sws. this process implicates that memories are reactivated during sleep but that the process doesnt enhance every memory. it also implicates that qualitative changes are made to the memories when they are transferred to long-term store during sleep. during sleep the hippocampus replays the events of the day for the neocortex. the neocortex then reviews and processes memories which moves them into long-term memory. when one does not get enough sleep it makes it more difficult to learn as these neural connections are not as strong resulting in a lower retention rate of memories. sleep deprivation makes it harder to focus resulting in inefficient learning. furthermore some studies have shown that sleep deprivation can lead to false memories as the memories are not properly transferred to long-term memory. one of the primary functions of sleep is thought to be the improvement of the consolidation of information as several studies have demonstrated that memory depends on getting sufficient sleep between training and test. additionally data obtained from neuroimaging studies have shown activation patterns in the sleeping brain that mirror those recorded during the learning of tasks from the previous day suggesting that new memories may be solidified through such rehearsal.


although people often think that memory operates like recording equipment this is not the case. the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction and maintenance of memory are very dynamic and comprise distinct phases covering a time window from seconds to even a lifetime. in fact research has revealed that our memories are constructed current hypotheses suggest that constructive processes allow individuals to simulate and imagine future episodes happenings and scenarios. since the future is not an exact repetition of the past simulation of future episodes requires a complex system that can draw on the past in a manner that flexibly extracts and recombines elements of previous experiences  a constructive rather than a reproductive system. people can construct their memories when they encode them and/or when they recall them. to illustrate consider a classic study conducted by elizabeth loftus and john palmer  in which people were instructed to watch a film of a traffic accident and then asked about what they saw. the researchers found that the people who were asked how fast were the cars going when they smashed into each other gave higher estimates than those who were asked how fast were the cars going when they hit each other furthermore when asked a week later whether they had seen broken glass in the film those who had been asked the question with smashed were twice more likely to report that they had seen broken glass than those who had been asked the question with hit. there was no broken glass depicted in the film. thus the wording of the questions distorted viewers memories of the event. importantly the wording of the question led people to construct different memories of the event  those who were asked the question with smashed recalled a more serious car accident than they had actually seen. the findings of this experiment were replicated around the world and researchers consistently demonstrated that when people were provided with misleading information they tended to misremember a phenomenon known as the misinformation effect.

research has revealed that asking individuals to repeatedly imagine actions that they have never performed or events that they have never experienced could result in false memories. for instance goff and roediger  asked participants to imagine that they performed an act e.g. break a toothpick and then later asked them whether they had done such a thing. findings revealed that those participants who repeatedly imagined performing such an act were more likely to think that they had actually performed that act during the first session of the experiment. similarly garry and her colleagues  asked college students to report how certain they were that they experienced a number of events as children e.g. broke a window with their hand and then two weeks later asked them to imagine four of those events. the researchers found that one-fourth of the students asked to imagine the four events reported that they had actually experienced such events as children. that is when asked to imagine the events they were more confident that they experienced the events.

research reported in  revealed that it is possible to artificially stimulate prior memories and artificially implant false memories in mice. using optogenetics a team of riken-mit scientists caused the mice to incorrectly associate a benign environment with a prior unpleasant experience from different surroundings. some scientists believe that the study may have implications in studying false memory formation in humans and in treating ptsd and schizophrenia.

memory reconsolidation is when previously consolidated memories are recalled or retrieved from long-term memory to your active consciousness. during this process memories can be further strengthened and added to but there is also risk of manipulation involved. we like to think of our memories as something stable and constant when they are stored in long-term memory but this isnt the case. there are a large number of studies that found that consolidation of memories is not a singular event but are put through the process again known as reconsolidation. this is when a memory is recalled or retrieved and placed back into your working memory. the memory is now open to manipulation from outside sources and the misinformation effect which could be due to misattributing the source of the inconsistent information with or without an intact original memory trace lindsay and johnson . one thing that can be sure is that memory is malleable.

this new research into the concept of reconsolidation has opened the door to methods to help those with unpleasant memories or those that struggle with memories. an example of this is if you had a truly frightening experience and recall that memory in a less arousing environment the memory will be weaken the next time it is retrieved. some studies suggest that over-trained or strongly reinforced memories do not undergo reconsolidation if reactivated the first few days after training but do become sensitive to reconsolidation interference with time. this however does not mean that all memory is susceptible to reconsolidation. there is evidence to suggest that memory that has undergone strong training and whether or not is it intentional is less likely to undergo reconsolidation. there was further testing done with rats and mazes that showed that reactivated memories were more susceptible to manipulation in both good and bad ways than newly formed memories. it is still not known whether or not these are new memories formed and its an inability to retrieve the proper one for the situation or if its a reconsolidated memory. because the study of reconsolidation is still a newer concept there is still debate on whether it should be considered scientifically sound.


a ucla research study published in the june  issue of the american journal of geriatric psychiatry found that people can improve cognitive function and brain efficiency through simple lifestyle changes such as incorporating memory exercises healthy eating physical fitness and stress reduction into their daily lives. this study examined  subjects average age  with normal memory performance. eight subjects were asked to follow a brain healthy diet relaxation physical and mental exercise brain teasers and verbal memory training techniques. after  days they showed greater word fluency not memory compared to their baseline performance. no long-term follow-up was conducted; it is therefore unclear if this intervention has lasting effects on memory.

there are a loosely associated group of mnemonic principles and techniques that can be used to vastly improve memory known as the art of memory.

the international longevity center released in  a report which includes in pages  recommendations for keeping the mind in good functionality until advanced age. some of the recommendations are to stay intellectually active through learning training or reading to keep physically active so to promote blood circulation to the brain to socialize to reduce stress to keep sleep time regular to avoid depression or emotional instability and to observe good nutrition.

memorization is a method of learning that allows an individual to recall information verbatim. rote learning is the method most often used. methods of memorizing things have been the subject of much discussion over the years with some writers such as cosmos rossellius using visual alphabets. the spacing effect shows that an individual is more likely to remember a list of items when rehearsal is spaced over an extended period of time. in contrast to this is cramming an intensive memorization in a short period of time. the spacing effect is exploited to improve memory in spaced repetition flashcard training. also relevant is the zeigarnik effect which states that people remember uncompleted or interrupted tasks better than completed ones. the so-called method of loci uses spatial memory to memorize non-spatial information.


plants lack a specialized organ devoted to memory retention and so plant memory has been a controversial topic in recent years. new advances in the field have identified the presence of neurotransmitters in plants adding to the hypothesis that plants are capable of remembering. action potentials a physiological response characteristic of neurons have been shown to have an influence on plants as well including in wound responses and photosynthesis. in addition to these homologous features of memory systems in both plants and animals plants have also been observed to encode store and retrieve basic short-term memories.

one of the most well-studied plants to show rudimentary memory is the venus flytrap. native to the subtropical wetlands of the eastern united states venus fly traps have evolved the ability to obtain meat for sustenance likely due to the lack of nitrogen in the soil. this is done by two trap-forming leaf tips that snap shut once triggered by a potential prey. on each lobe three triggers hairs await stimulation. in order to maximize the benefit to cost ratio the plant enables a rudimentary form of memory in which two trigger hairs must be stimulated within  seconds in order to result in trap closure. this system ensures that the trap only closes when potential prey is within grasp.

the time lapse between trigger hair stimulations suggests that the plant can remember an initial stimulus long enough for a second stimulus to initiate trap closure. this memory isnt encoded in a brain as plants lack this specialized organ. rather information is stored in the form of cytoplasmic calcium levels. the first trigger causes a subthreshold cytoplasmic calcium influx. this initial trigger isnt enough to activate trap closure and so a subsequent stimulus allows for a secondary influx of calcium. the latter calcium rise superimposes on the initial one creating an action potential that passes threshold resulting in trap closure. researchers to prove that an electrical threshold must be met to stimulate trap closure excited a single trigger hair with a constant mechanical stimulus using ag/agcl electrodes. the trap closed after only a few seconds. this experiment gave evidence to demonstrate that the electrical threshold not necessarily the number of trigger hair stimulations was the contributing factor in venus fly trap memory. it has been shown that trap closure can be blocked using uncouplers and inhibitors of voltage-gated channels. after trap closure these electrical signals stimulate glandular production of jasmonic acid and hydrolases allowing for digestion of the prey.

the field of plant neurobiology has gained a large amount of interest over the past decade leading to an influx of research regarding plant memory. although the venus flytrap is one of the more highly studied many other plants exhibit the capacity to remember including the mimosa pudica through an experiment conducted by monica gagliano and colleagues in . to study the mimosa pudica gagliano designed an appartus with which potted mimosa plants could be repeatedly dropped the same distance and at the same speed. it was observed that the plants defensive response of curling up its leaves decreased over the  times the experiment was repeated per plant. to confirm that this was a mechanism of memory rather than exhaustion some of the plants were shaken post experiment and displayed normal defensive responses of leaf curling. this experiment also demonstrated long term memory in the plants as it was repeated a month later and the plants were observed to remain unfazed by the dropping. as the field expands it is likely that we will learn more about the capacity of a plant to remember.


metaphysics is the branch of philosophy that examines the fundamental nature of reality including the relationship between mind and matter between substance and attribute and between potentiality and actuality. the word metaphysics comes from two greek words that together literally mean after or behind or among the study of the natural. it has been suggested that the term might have been coined by a first century ad editor who assembled various small selections of aristotles works into the treatise we now know by the name metaphysics ta meta ta phusika after the physics another of aristotles works.

metaphysics studies questions related to what it is for something to exist and what types of existence there are. metaphysics seeks to answer in an abstract and fully general manner the questions

what is there
what is it like
topics of metaphysical investigation include existence objects and their properties space and time cause and effect and possibility.

metaphysical study is conducted using deduction from that which is known a priori. like foundational mathematics which is sometimes considered a special case of metaphysics applied to the existence of number it tries to give a coherent account of the structure of the world capable of explaining our everyday and scientific perception of the world and being free from contradictions. in mathematics there are many different ways to define numbers; similarly in metaphysics there are many different ways to define objects properties concepts and other entities which are claimed to make up the world. while metaphysics may as a special case study the entities postulated by fundamental science such as atoms and superstrings its core topic is the set of categories such as object property and causality which those scientific theories assume. for example claiming that electrons have charge is a scientific theory; while exploring what it means for electrons to be or at least to be perceived as objects charge to be a property and for both to exist in a topological entity called space is the task of metaphysics.

there are two broad stances about what is the world studied by metaphysics. the strong classical view assumes that the objects studied by metaphysics exist independently of any observer so that the subject is the most fundamental of all sciences. the weak modern view assumes that the objects studied by metaphysics exist inside the mind of an observer so the subject becomes a form of introspection and conceptual analysis. some philosophers notably kant discuss both of these worlds and what can be inferred about each one. some such as the logical positivists and many scientists reject the strong view of metaphysics as meaningless and unverifiable. others reply that this criticism also applies to any type of knowledge including hard science which claims to describe anything other than the contents of human perception and thus that the world of perception is the objective world in some sense. metaphysics itself usually assumes that some stance has been taken on these questions and that it may proceed independently of the choicethe question of which stance to take belongs instead to another branch of philosophy epistemology.

ontology is the philosophical study of the nature of being becoming existence or reality as well as the basic categories of being and their relations.failed verification traditionally listedby whom as the core of metaphysics ontology often deals with questions concerning what entities exist and how such entities may be grouped related within a hierarchy and subdivided according to similarities and differences.

see also identity philosophy and philosophy of space and time
identity is a fundamental metaphysical concern. metaphysicians investigating identity are tasked with the question of what exactly it means for something to be identical to itself or  more controversially  to something else. issues of identity arise in the context of time what does it mean for something to be itself across two moments in time how do we account for this another question of identity arises when we ask what our criteria ought to be for determining identity and how the reality of identity interfaces with linguistic expressions.

the metaphysical positions one takes on identity have far-reaching implications on issues such as the mindbody problem personal identity ethics and law.

a few ancient greeks took extreme positions on the nature of change. parmenides denied change altogether while heraclitus argued that change was ubiquitous no man ever steps in the same river twice.

identity sometimes called numerical identity is the relation that a thing bears to itself and which no thing bears to anything other than itself cf. sameness.

a modern philosopher who made a lasting impact on the philosophy of identity was leibniz whose law of the indiscernibility of identicals is still widely accepted today. it states that if some object x is identical to some object y then any property that x has y will have as well.

put formally it states

{\displaystyle \forall x\;\forall y\;x=y\rightarrow \forall p\;px\leftrightarrow py}{\displaystyle \forall x\;\forall y\;x=y\rightarrow \forall p\;px\leftrightarrow py}
however it does seem that objects can change over time. if one were to look at a tree one day and the tree later lost a leaf it would seem that one could still be looking at that same tree. two rival theories to account for the relationship between change and identity are perdurantism which treats the tree as a series of tree-stages and endurantism which maintains that the organismthe same treeis present at every stage in its history.

by appealing to intrinsic and extrinsic properties endurantism finds a way to harmonize identity with change. endurantists believe that objects persist by being strictly numerically identical over time. however if leibnizs law of the indiscernibility of identicals is utilized to define numerical identity here it seems that objects must be completely unchanged in order to persist. discriminating between intrinsic properties and extrinsic properties endurantists state that numerical identity means that if some object x is identical to some object y then any intrinsic property that x has y will have as well. thus if an object persists intrinsic properties of it are unchanged but extrinsic properties can change over time. besides the object itself environments and other objects can change over time; properties that relate to other objects would change even if this object does not change.

perdurantism can harmonize identity with change in another way. in four-dimensionalism a version of perdurantism what persists is a four-dimensional object which does not change although three-dimensional slices of the object may differ.


see also philosophy of space and time
objects appear to us in space and time while abstract entities such as classes properties and relations do not. how do space and time serve this function as a ground for objects are space and time entities themselves of some form must they exist prior to objects how exactly can they be defined how is time related to change; must there always be something changing in order for time to exist


classical philosophy recognized a number of causes including teleological future causes. in special relativity and quantum field theory the notions of space time and causality become tangled together with temporal orders of causations becoming dependent on who is observing them.citation needed the laws of physics are symmetrical in time so could equally well be used to describe time as running backwards. why then do we perceive it as flowing in one direction the arrow of time and as containing causation flowing in the same direction

for that matter can an effect precede its cause this was the title of a  paper by michael dummett which sparked a discussion that continues today. earlier in  c. s. lewis had argued that one can meaningfully pray concerning the outcome of e.g. a medical test while recognizing that the outcome is determined by past events my free act contributes to the cosmic shape. likewise some interpretations of quantum mechanics dating to  involve backward-in-time causal influences.

causality is linked by many philosophers to the concept of counterfactuals. to say that a caused b means that if a had not happened then b would not have happened. this view was advanced by david lewis in his  paper causation. his subsequent papers further develop his theory of causation.

causality is usually required as a foundation for philosophy of science if science aims to understand causes and effects and make predictions about them.


metaphysicians investigate questions about the ways the world could have been. david lewis in on the plurality of worlds endorsed a view called concrete modal realism according to which facts about how things could have been are made true by other concrete worlds in which things are different. other philosophers including gottfried leibniz have dealt with the idea of possible worlds as well. a necessary fact is true across all possible worlds. a possible fact is true in some possible world even if not in the actual world. for example it is possible that cats could have had two tails or that any particular apple could have not existed. by contrast certain propositions seem necessarily true such as analytic propositions e.g. all bachelors are unmarried. the view that any analytic truth is necessary is not universally held among philosophers. a less controversial view is that self-identity is necessary as it seems fundamentally incoherent to claim that any x is not identical to itself; this is known as the law of identity a putative first principle. similarly aristotle describes the principle of non-contradiction

it is impossible that the same quality should both belong and not belong to the same thing ... this is the most certain of all principles ... wherefore they who demonstrate refer to this as an ultimate opinion. for it is by nature the source of all the other axioms.
peripheral questions
what is central and peripheral to metaphysics has varied over time and schools; however contemporary analytic philosophy as taught in usa and uk universities generally regards the above as central and the following as applications or peripheral topics; or in some cases as distinct subjects which have grown out of and depend upon metaphysicscitation needed


metaphysical cosmology is the branch of metaphysics that deals with the world as the totality of all phenomena in space and time. historically it formed a major part of the subject alongside ontology though its role is more peripheral in contemporary philosophy. it has had a broad scope and in many cases was founded in religion. the ancient greeks drew no distinction between this use and their model for the cosmos. however in modern times it addresses questions about the universe which are beyond the scope of the physical sciences. it is distinguished from religious cosmology in that it approaches these questions using philosophical methods e.g. dialectics.

cosmogony deals specifically with the origin of the universe. modern metaphysical cosmology and cosmogony try to address questions such as

what is the origin of the universe what is its first cause is its existence necessary see monism pantheism emanationism and creationism
what are the ultimate material components of the universe see mechanism dynamism hylomorphism atomism
what is the ultimate reason for the existence of the universe does the cosmos have a purpose see teleology


different approaches toward resolving the mindbody problem
accounting for the existence of mind in a world largely composed of matter is a metaphysical problem which is so large and important as to have become a specialized subject of study in its own right philosophy of mind.

substance dualism is a classical theory in which mind and body are essentially different with the mind having some of the attributes traditionally assigned to the soul and which creates an immediate conceptual puzzle about how the two interact. this form of substance dualism differs from the dualism of some eastern philosophical traditions like nyya which also posit a soul; for the soul under their view is ontologically distinct from the mind. idealism postulates that material objects do not exist unless perceived and only as perceptions. adherents of panpsychism a kind of property dualism hold that everything has a mental aspect but not that everything exists in a mind. neutral monism postulates that existence consists of a single substance that in itself is neither mental nor physical but is capable of mental and physical aspects or attributes  thus it implies a dual-aspect theory. for the last century the dominant theories have been science-inspired including materialistic monism type identity theory token identity theory functionalism reductive physicalism nonreductive physicalism eliminative materialism anomalous monism property dualism epiphenomenalism and emergence.


determinism is the philosophical proposition that every event including human cognition decision and action is causally determined by an unbroken chain of prior occurrences. it holds that nothing happens that has not already been determined. the principal consequence of the deterministic claim is that it poses a challenge to the existence of free will.

the problem of free will is the problem of whether rational agents exercise control over their own actions and decisions. addressing this problem requires understanding the relation between freedom and causation and determining whether the laws of nature are causally deterministic. some philosophers known as incompatibilists view determinism and free will as mutually exclusive. if they believe in determinism they will therefore believe free will to be an illusion a position known as hard determinism. proponents range from baruch spinoza to ted honderich. henri bergson defended free will in his dissertation time and free will from .

others labeled compatibilists or soft determinists believe that the two ideas can be reconciled coherently. adherents of this view include thomas hobbes and many modern philosophers such as john martin fischer gary watson harry frankfurt and the like.

incompatibilists who accept free will but reject determinism are called libertarians a term not to be confused with the political sense. robert kane and alvin plantinga are modern defenders of this theory.


the earliest type of classification of social construction traces back to plato in his dialogue phaedrus where he claims that the biological classification system seems to carve nature at the joints. in contrast later philosophers such as michel foucault and jorge luis borges have challenged the capacity of natural and social classification. in his essay the analytical language of john wilkins borges makes us imagine a certain encyclopedia where the animals are divided into a those that belong to the emperor; b embalmed ones; c those that are trained;... and so forth in order to bring forward the ambiguity of natural and social kinds. according to metaphysics author alyssa ney the reason all this is interesting is that there seems to be a metaphysical difference between the borgesian system and platos. the difference is not obvious but one classification attempts to carve entities up according to objective distinction while the other does not. according to quine this notion is closely related to the notion of similarity.


there are different ways to set up the notion of number in metaphysics theories. platonist theories postulate number as a fundamental category itself. others consider it to be a property of an entity called a group comprising other entities; or to be a relation held between several groups of entities such as the number four is the set of all sets of four things. many of the debates around universals are applied to the study of number and are of particular importance due to its status as a foundation for the philosophy of mathematics and for mathematics itself.


although metaphysics as a philosophical enterprise is highly hypothetical it also has practical application in most other branches of philosophy science and now also information technology. such areas generally assume some basic ontology such as a system of objects properties classes and space time as well as other metaphysical stances on topics such as causality and agency then build their own particular theories upon these.

in science for example some theories are based on the ontological assumption of objects with properties such as electrons having charge while others may reject objects completely such as quantum field theories where spread-out electronness becomes a property of space time rather than an object.

social branches of philosophy such as philosophy of morality aesthetics and philosophy of religion which in turn give rise to practical subjects such as ethics politics law and art all require metaphysical foundations which may be considered as branches or applications of metaphysics. for example they may postulate the existence of basic entities such as value beauty and god. then they use these postulates to make their own arguments about consequences resulting from them. when philosophers in these subjects make their foundations they are doing applied metaphysics and may draw upon its core topics and methods to guide them including ontology and other core and peripheral topics. as in science the foundations chosen will in turn depend on the underlying ontology used so philosophers in these subjects may have to dig right down to the ontological layer of metaphysics to find what is possible for their theories. for example a contradiction obtained in a theory of god or beauty might be due to an assumption that it is an object rather than some other kind of ontological entity.


prior to the modern history of science scientific questions were addressed as a part of natural philosophy. originally the term science latin scientia simply meant knowledge. the scientific method however transformed natural philosophy into an empirical activity deriving from experiment unlike the rest of philosophy. by the end of the th century it had begun to be called science to distinguish it from other branches of philosophy. science and philosophy have been considered separated disciplines ever since. thereafter metaphysics denoted philosophical enquiry of a non-empirical character into the nature of existence.

metaphysics continues asking why where science leaves off. for example any theory of fundamental physics is based on some set of axioms which may postulate the existence of entities such as atoms particles forces charges mass or fields. stating such postulates is considered to be the end of a science theory. metaphysics takes these postulates and explores what they mean as human concepts. for example do all theories of physics require the existence of space and time objects and properties or can they be expressed using only objects or only properties do the objects have to retain their identity over time or can they change if they change then are they still the same object can theories be reformulated by converting properties or predicates such as red into entities such as redness or redness fields or processes there is some redding happening over there appears in some human languages in place of the use of properties. is the distinction between objects and properties fundamental to the physical world or to our perception of it

much recent work has been devoted to analyzing the role of metaphysics in scientific theorizing. alexandre koyr led this movement declaring in his book metaphysics and measurement it is not by following experiment but by outstripping experiment that the scientific mind makes progress. that metaphysical propositions can influence scientific theorizing is john watkins most lasting contribution to philosophy. since  he showed the ways in which some un-testable and hence according to popperian ideas non-empirical propositions can nevertheless be influential in the development of properly testable and hence scientific theories. these profound results in applied elementary logic...represented an important corrective to positivist teachings about the meaninglessness of metaphysics and of normative claims. imre lakatos maintained that all scientific theories have a metaphysical hard core essential for the generation of hypotheses and theoretical assumptions. thus according to lakatos scientific changes are connected with vast cataclysmic metaphysical revolutions.

an example from biology of lakatos thesis david hull has argued that changes in the ontological status of the species concept have been central in the development of biological thought from aristotle through cuvier lamarck and darwin. darwins ignorance of metaphysics made it more difficult for him to respond to his critics because he could not readily grasp the ways in which their underlying metaphysical views differed from his own.

in physics new metaphysical ideas have arisen in connection with quantum mechanics where subatomic particles arguably do not have the same sort of individuality as the particulars with which philosophy has traditionally been concerned. also adherence to a deterministic metaphysics in the face of the challenge posed by the quantum-mechanical uncertainty principle led physicists such as albert einstein to propose alternative theories that retained determinism. a.n. whitehead is famous for creating a process philosophy metaphysics inspired by electromagnetism and special relativity.

in chemistry gilbert newton lewis addressed the nature of motion arguing that an electron should not be said to move when it has none of the properties of motion.

katherine hawley notes that the metaphysics even of a widely accepted scientific theory may be challenged if it can be argued that the metaphysical presuppositions of the theory make no contribution to its predictive success.


metametaphysics is the branch of philosophy that is concerned with the foundations of metaphysics. a number of individuals have suggested that much or all of metaphysics should be rejected a metametaphysical position known as metaphysical deflationisma or ontological deflationism.

in the th century francis bacon rejected scholastic metaphysics and argued strongly for what is now called empiricism being seen later as the father of modern empirical science. in the th century david hume took a strong position arguing that all genuine knowledge involves either mathematics or matters of fact and that metaphysics which goes beyond these is worthless. he concludes his enquiry concerning human understanding with the statement

if we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics for instance; let us ask does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number no. does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence no. commit it then to the flames for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.

thirty-three years after humes enquiry appeared immanuel kant published his critique of pure reason. although he followed hume in rejecting much of previous metaphysics he argued that there was still room for some synthetic a priori knowledge concerned with matters of fact yet obtainable independent of experience. these included fundamental structures of space time and causality. he also argued for the freedom of the will and the existence of things in themselves the ultimate but unknowable objects of experience.

wittgenstein introduced the concept that metaphysics could be influenced by theories of aesthetics via logic vis. a world composed of atomical facts.

in the s a.j. ayer and rudolf carnap endorsed humes position; carnap quoted the passage above. they argued that metaphysical statements are neither true nor false but meaningless since according to their verifiability theory of meaning a statement is meaningful only if there can be empirical evidence for or against it. thus while ayer rejected the monism of spinoza he avoided a commitment to pluralism the contrary position by holding both views to be without meaning. carnap took a similar line with the controversy over the reality of the external world. while the logical positivism movement is now considered dead with ayer a major proponent admitting in a  tv interview that nearly all of it was false it has continued to influence philosophy development.

arguing against such rejections the scholastic philosopher edward feser held that humes critique of metaphysics and specifically humes fork is notoriously self-refuting. feser argues that humes fork itself is not a conceptual truth and is not empirically testable.

some living philosophers such as amie thomasson have argued that many metaphysical questions can be dissolved just by looking at the way we use words; others such as ted sider have argued that metaphysical questions are substantive and that we can make progress toward answering them by comparing theories according to a range of theoretical virtues inspired by the sciences such as simplicity and explanatory power.

etymology
the word metaphysics derives from the greek words  met after and  physik physics. it was first used as the title for several of aristotles works because they were usually anthologized after the works on physics in complete editions. the prefix meta- after indicates that these works come after the chapters on physics. however aristotle himself did not call the subject of these books metaphysics he referred to it as first philosophy greek  ; latin philosophia prima. the editor of aristotles works andronicus of rhodes is thought to have placed the books on first philosophy right after another work physics and called them      t met t physik bibla or the books that come after the books on physics.

however once the name was given the commentators sought to find other reasons for its appropriateness. for instance thomas aquinas understood it to refer to the chronological or pedagogical order among our philosophical studies so that the metaphysical sciences would mean those that we study after having mastered the sciences that deal with the physical world.

the term was misread by other medieval commentators who thought it meant the science of what is beyond the physical. following this tradition the prefix meta- has more recently been prefixed to the names of sciences to designate higher sciences dealing with ulterior and more fundamental problems hence metamathematics metaphysiology etc.

a person who creates or develops metaphysical theories is called a metaphysician.

common parlance also uses the word metaphysics for a different referent from that of the present article namely for beliefs in arbitrary non-physical or magical entities. for example metaphysical healing to refer to healing by means of remedies that are magical rather than scientific. this usage stemmed from the various historical schools of speculative metaphysics which operated by postulating all manner of physical mental and spiritual entities as bases for particular metaphysical systems. metaphysics as a subject does not preclude beliefs in such magical entities but neither does it promote them. rather it is the subject which provides the vocabulary and logic with which such beliefs might be analyzed and studied for example to search for inconsistencies both within themselves and with other accepted systems such as science.


cognitive archeology such as analysis of cave paintings and other pre-historic art and customs suggests that a form of perennial philosophy or shamanic metaphysics may stretch back to the birth of behavioral modernity all around the world. similar beliefs are found in present-day stone age cultures such as australian aboriginals. perennial philosophy postulates the existence of a spirit or concept world alongside the day-to-day world and interactions between these worlds during dreaming and ritual or on special days or at special places. it has been argued that perennial philosophy formed the basis for platonism with plato articulating rather than creating much older widespread beliefs.


bronze age cultures such as ancient mesopotamia and ancient egypt along with similarly structured but chronologically later cultures such as mayans and aztecs developed belief systems based on mythology anthropomorphic gods mindbody dualism and a spirit world to explain causes and cosmology. these cultures appear to have been interested in astronomy and may have associated or identified the stars with some of these entities. in ancient egypt the ontological distinction between order maat and chaos isfet seems to have been important.

the circled dot was used by the pythagoreans and later greeks to represent the first metaphysical being the monad or the absolute.
the first named greek philosopher according to aristotle is thales of miletus early th century bce. he made use of purely physical explanations to explain the phenomena of the world rather than the mythological and divine explanations of tradition. he is thought to have posited water as the single underlying principle or arche in later aristotelian terminology of the material world. his fellow but younger miletians anaximander and anaximenes also posited monistic underlying principles namely apeiron the indefinite or boundless and air respectively.

another school was the eleatics in southern italy. the group was founded in the early fifth century bce by parmenides and included zeno of elea and melissus of samos. methodologically the eleatics were broadly rationalist and took logical standards of clarity and necessity to be the criteria of truth. parmenides chief doctrine was that reality is a single unchanging and universal being. zeno used reductio ad absurdum to demonstrate the illusory nature of change and time in his paradoxes.

heraclitus of ephesus in contrast made change central teaching that all things flow. his philosophy expressed in brief aphorisms is quite cryptic. for instance he also taught the unity of opposites.

democritus and his teacher leucippus are known for formulating an atomic theory for the cosmos. they are considered forerunners of the scientific method.


the modern yin and yang symbol taijitu
metaphysics in chinese philosophy can be traced back to the earliest chinese philosophical concepts from the zhou dynasty such as tian heaven and yin and yang. the fourth century bce saw a turn towards cosmogony with the rise of taoism in the daodejing and zhuangzi and sees the natural world as dynamic and constantly changing processes which spontaneously arise from a single immanent metaphysical source or principle tao. another philosophical school which arose around this time was the school of naturalists which saw the ultimate metaphysical principle as the taiji the supreme polarity composed of the forces of yin and yang which were always in a state of change seeking balance. another concern of chinese metaphysics especially taoism is the relationship and nature of being and non-being you  and wu . the taoists held that the ultimate the tao was also non-being or no-presence. other important concepts were those of spontaneous generation or natural vitality ziran and correlative resonance ganying.

after the fall of the han dynasty  ce china saw the rise of the neo-taoist xuanxue school. this school was very influential in developing the concepts of later chinese metaphysics. buddhist philosophy entered china c. st century and was influenced by the native chinese metaphysical concepts to develop new theories. the native tiantai and huayen schools of philosophy maintained and reinterpreted the indian theories of shunyata emptiness kong  and buddha-nature fo xing  into the theory of interpenetration of phenomena. neo-confucians like zhang zai under the influence of other schools developed the concepts of principle li and vital energy qi.

socrates is known for his dialectic or questioning approach to philosophy rather than a positive metaphysical doctrine.

his pupil plato is famous for his theory of forms which he places in the mouth of socrates in his dialogues. platonic realism also considered a form of idealism is considered to be a solution to the problem of universals; i.e. what particular objects have in common is that they share a specific form which is universal to all others of their respective kind.

the theory has a number of other aspects

epistemological knowledge of the forms is more certain than mere sensory data.
ethical the form of the good sets an objective standard for morality.
time and change the world of the forms is eternal and unchanging. time and change belong only to the lower sensory world. time is a moving image of eternity.
abstract objects and mathematics numbers geometrical figures etc. exist mind-independently in the world of forms.
platonism developed into neoplatonism a philosophy with a monotheistic and mystical flavour that survived well into the early christian era.

platos pupil aristotle wrote widely on almost every subject including metaphysics. his solution to the problem of universals contrasts with platos. whereas platonic forms are existentially apparent in the visible world aristotelian essences dwell in particulars.

potentiality and actuality are principles of a dichotomy which aristotle used throughout his philosophical works to analyze motion causality and other issues.

the aristotelian theory of change and causality stretches to four causes the material formal efficient and final. the efficient cause corresponds to what is now known as a cause simplicity. final causes are explicitly teleological a concept now regarded as controversial in science. the matter/form dichotomy was to become highly influential in later philosophy as the substance/essence distinction.

the opening arguments in aristotles metaphysics book i revolve around the senses knowledge experience theory and wisdom. the first main focus in the metaphysics is attempting to determine how intellect advances from sensation through memory experience and art to theoretical knowledge. aristotle claims that eyesight provides us with the capability to recognize and remember experiences while sound allows us to learn.

skhya is an ancient system of indian philosophy based on a dualism involving the ultimate principles of consciousness and matter. it is described as the rationalist school of indian philosophy. it is most related to the yoga school of hinduism and its method was most influential on the development of early buddhism.

the smkhya is an enumerationist philosophy whose epistemology accepts three of six pramanas proofs as the only reliable means of gaining knowledge. these include pratyaka perception anuma inference and abda ptavacana word/testimony of reliable sources.

samkhya is strongly dualist. smkhya philosophy regards the universe as consisting of two realities; purua consciousness and prakti matter. jiva a living being is that state in which purua is bonded to prakti in some form. this fusion state the samkhya scholars led to the emergence of buddhi spiritual awareness and ahakra ego consciousness. the universe is described by this school as one created by purusa-prakti entities infused with various permutations and combinations of variously enumerated elements senses feelings activity and mind. during the state of imbalance one of more constituents overwhelm the others creating a form of bondage particularly of the mind. the end of this imbalance bondage is called liberation or moksha by the samkhya school.

the existence of god or supreme being is not directly asserted nor considered relevant by the samkhya philosophers. skhya denies the final cause of ishvara god. while the samkhya school considers the vedas as a reliable source of knowledge it is an atheistic philosophy according to paul deussen and other scholars. a key difference between samkhya and yoga schools state scholars is that yoga school accepts a personal yet essentially inactive deity or personal god.

samkhya is known for its theory of guas qualities innate tendencies. gua it states are of three types sattva being good compassionate illuminating positive and constructive; rajas is one of activity chaotic passion impulsive potentially good or bad; and tamas being the quality of darkness ignorance destructive lethargic negative. everything all life forms and human beings state samkhya scholars have these three guas but in different proportions. the interplay of these guas defines the character of someone or something of nature and determines the progress of life. the samkhya theory of guas was widely discussed developed and refined by various schools of indian philosophies including buddhism. samkhyas philosophical treatises also influenced the development of various theories of hindu ethics.

realization of the nature of self-identity is the principal object of the vedanta system of indian metaphysics. in the upanishads self-consciousness is not the first-person indexical self-awareness or the self-awareness which is self-reference without identification and also not the self-consciousness which as a kind of desire is satisfied by another self-consciousness. it is self-realisation; the realisation of the self consisting of consciousness that leads all else.

the word self-consciousness in the upanishads means the knowledge about the existence and nature of brahman. it means the consciousness of our own real being the primary reality. self-consciousness means self-knowledge the knowledge of prajna i.e. of prana which is brahman. according to the upanishads the atman or paramatman is phenomenally unknowable; it is the object of realisation. the atman is unknowable in its essential nature; it is unknowable in its essential nature because it is the eternal subject who knows about everything including itself. the atman is the knower and also the known.

metaphysicians regard the self either to be distinct from the absolute or entirely identical with the absolute. they have given form to three schools of thought  a the dualistic school b the quasi-dualistic school and c the monistic school as the result of their varying mystical experiences. prakrti and atman when treated as two separate and distinct aspects form the basis of the dualism of the shvetashvatara upanishad. quasi-dualism is reflected in the vaishnavite-monotheism of ramanuja and the absolute monism in the teachings of adi shankara.

self-consciousness is the fourth state of consciousness or turiya the first three being vaisvanara taijasa and prajna. these are the four states of individual consciousness.

there are three distinct stages leading to self-realisation. the first stage is in mystically apprehending the glory of the self within us as though we were distinct from it. the second stage is in identifying the i-within with the self that we are in essential nature entirely identical with the pure self. the third stage is in realising that the atman is brahman that there is no difference between the self and the absolute. the fourth stage is in realising i am the absolute  aham brahman asmi. the fifth stage is in realising that brahman is the all that exists as also that which does not exist.

in buddhist philosophy there are various metaphysical traditions that have proposed different questions about the nature of reality based on the teachings of the buddha in the early buddhist texts. the buddha of the early texts does not focus on metaphysical questions but on ethical and spiritual training and in some cases he dismisses certain metaphysical questions as unhelpful and indeterminate avyakta which he recommends should be set aside. the development of systematic metaphysics arose after the buddhas death with the rise of the abhidharma traditions. the buddhist abhidharma schools developed their analysis of reality based on the concept of dharmas which are the ultimate physical and mental events that make up experience and their relations to each other. noa ronkin has called their approach phenomenological.

later philosophical traditions include the madhyamika school of nagarjuna which further developed the theory of the emptiness shunyata of all phenomena or dharmas which rejects any kind of substance. this has been interpreted as a form of anti-foundationalism and anti-realism which sees reality as having no ultimate essence or ground. the yogacara school meanwhile promoted a theory called awareness only vijnapti-matra which has been interpreted as a form of idealism or phenomenology and denies the split between awareness itself and the objects of awareness.

major ideas in sufi metaphysics have surrounded the concept of wedah  meaning unity or in arabic  tawhid. wadat al-wujd literally means the unity of existence or unity of being. the phrase has been translated pantheism. wujud i.e. existence or presence here refers to allahs wujud compare tawhid. on the other hand wadat ash-shuhd meaning apparentism or monotheism of witness holds that god and his creation are entirely separate.

between about  and  philosophy as a discipline took place as part of the catholic churchs teaching system known as scholasticism. scholastic philosophy took place within an established framework blending christian theology with aristotelian teachings. although fundamental orthodoxies were not commonly challenged there were nonetheless deep metaphysical disagreements particularly over the problem of universals which engaged duns scotus and pierre abelard. william of ockham is remembered for his principle of ontological parsimony.

in the early modern period th and th centuries the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy that is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure reason. the scholastic concepts of substance and accident were employed.

leibniz proposed in his monadology a plurality of non-interacting substances.
descartes is famous for his dualism of material and mental substances.
spinoza believed reality was a single substance of god-or-nature.
wolff
christian wolff had theoretical philosophy divided into an ontology or philosophia prima as a general metaphysics which arises as a preliminary to the distinction of the three special metaphysics on the soul world and god rational psychology rational cosmology and rational theology. the three disciplines are called empirical and rational because they are independent of revelation. this scheme which is the counterpart of religious tripartition in creature creation and creator is best known to philosophical students by kants treatment of it in the critique of pure reason. in the preface of the nd edition of kants book wolff is defined the greatest of all dogmatic philosophers.

british empiricism marked something of a reaction to rationalist and system-building metaphysics or speculative metaphysics as it was pejoratively termed. the skeptic david hume famously declared that most metaphysics should be consigned to the flames see below. hume was notorious among his contemporaries as one of the first philosophers to openly doubt religion but is better known now for his critique of causality. john stuart mill thomas reid and john locke were less skeptical embracing a more cautious style of metaphysics based on realism common sense and science. other philosophers notably george berkeley were led from empiricism to idealistic metaphysics.

immanuel kant attempted a grand synthesis and revision of the trends already mentioned scholastic philosophy systematic metaphysics and skeptical empiricism not to forget the burgeoning science of his day. as did the systems builders he had an overarching framework in which all questions were to be addressed. like hume who famously woke him from his dogmatic slumbers he was suspicious of metaphysical speculation and also places much emphasis on the limitations of the human mind. kant described his shift in metaphysics away from making claims about an objective noumenal world towards exploring the subjective phenomenal world as a copernican revolution by analogy to though opposite in direction to copernicus shift from man the subject to the sun an object at the center of the universe.

kant saw rationalist philosophers as aiming for a kind of metaphysical knowledge he defined as the synthetic apriorithat is knowledge that does not come from the senses it is a priori but is nonetheless about reality synthetic. inasmuch as it is about reality it differs from abstract mathematical propositions which he terms analytical apriori and being apriori it is distinct from empirical scientific knowledge which he terms synthetic aposteriori. the only synthetic apriori knowledge we can have is of how our minds organise the data of the senses; that organising framework is space and time which for kant have no mind-independent existence but nonetheless operate uniformly in all humans. apriori knowledge of space and time is all that remains of metaphysics as traditionally conceived. there is a reality beyond sensory data or phenomena which he calls the realm of noumena; however we cannot know it as it is in itself but only as it appears to us. he allows himself to speculate that the origins of phenomenal god morality and free will might exist in the noumenal realm but these possibilities have to be set against its basic unknowability for humans. although he saw himself as having disposed of metaphysics in a sense he has generally been regarded in retrospect as having a metaphysics of his own and as beginning the modern analytical conception of the subject.

nineteenth century philosophy was overwhelmingly influenced by kant and his successors. schopenhauer schelling fichte and hegel all purveyed their own panoramic versions of german idealism kants own caution about metaphysical speculation and refutation of idealism having fallen by the wayside. the idealistic impulse continued into the early twentieth century with british idealists such as f.h. bradley and j.m.e. mctaggart. followers of karl marx took hegels dialectic view of history and re-fashioned it as materialism.

early analytic philosophy and positivism
during the period when idealism was dominant in philosophy science had been making great advances. the arrival of a new generation of scientifically minded philosophers led to a sharp decline in the popularity of idealism during the s.

analytic philosophy was spearheaded by bertrand russell and g.e. moore. russell and william james tried to compromise between idealism and materialism with the theory of neutral monism.

the early to mid twentieth century philosophy saw a trend to reject metaphysical questions as meaningless. the driving force behind this tendency was the philosophy of logical positivism as espoused by the vienna circle which argued that the meaning of a statement was its prediction of observable results of an experiment and thus that there is no need to postulate the existence of any objects other than these perceptual observations.

at around the same time the american pragmatists were steering a middle course between materialism and idealism. system-building metaphysics with a fresh inspiration from science was revived by a.n. whitehead and charles hartshorne.

the forces that shaped analytic philosophythe break with idealism and the influence of sciencewere much less significant outside the english speaking world although there was a shared turn toward language. continental philosophy continued in a trajectory from post kantianism.

the phenomenology of husserl and others was intended as a collaborative project for the investigation of the features and structure of consciousness common to all humans in line with kants basing his synthetic apriori on the uniform operation of consciousness. it was officially neutral with regards to ontology but was nonetheless to spawn a number of metaphysical systems. brentanos concept of intentionality would become widely influential including on analytic philosophy.

heidegger author of being and time saw himself as re-focusing on being-qua-being introducing the novel concept of dasein in the process. classing himself an existentialist sartre wrote an extensive study of being and nothingness.

the speculative realism movement marks a return to full blooded realism.

there are two fundamental aspects of everyday experience change and persistence. until recently the western philosophical tradition has arguably championed substance and persistence with some notable exceptions however. according to process thinkers novelty flux and accident do matter and sometimes they constitute the ultimate reality.

in a broad sense process metaphysics is as old as western philosophy with figures such as heraclitus plotinus duns scotus leibniz david hume georg wilhelm friedrich hegel friedrich wilhelm joseph von schelling gustav theodor fechner friedrich adolf trendelenburg charles renouvier karl marx ernst mach friedrich wilhelm nietzsche mile boutroux henri bergson samuel alexander and nicolas berdyaev. it seemingly remains an open question whether major continental figures such as the late martin heidegger maurice merleau-ponty gilles deleuze michel foucault or jacques derrida should be included.

in a strict sense process metaphysics may be limited to the works of a few founding fathers g.w.f. hegel charles sanders peirce william james henri bergson a.n. whitehead and john dewey. from a european perspective there was a very significant and early whiteheadian influence on the works of outstanding scholars such as mile meyerson  louis couturat  jean wahl  robin george collingwood  philippe devaux  hans jonas  dorothy m. emmett  maurice merleau ponty  enzo paci  charlie dunbar broad  wolfe mays  ilya prigogine  jules vuillemin  jean ladrire  gilles deleuze  wolfhart pannenberg  and reiner wiehl .

while early analytic philosophy tended to reject metaphysical theorizing under the influence of logical positivism it was revived in the second half of the twentieth century. philosophers such as david k. lewis and david armstrong developed elaborate theories on a range of topics such as universals causation possibility and necessity and abstract objects. however the focus of analytic philosophy generally is away from the construction of all-encompassing systems and toward close analysis of individual ideas.

among the developments that led to the revival of metaphysical theorizing were quines attack on the analyticsynthetic distinction which was generally taken to undermine carnaps distinction between existence questions internal to a framework and those external to it.

the philosophy of fiction the problem of empty names and the debate over existences status as a property have all come of relative obscurity into the limelight while perennial issues such as free will possible worlds and the philosophy of time have had new life breathed into them.

the analytic view is of metaphysics as studying phenomenal human concepts rather than making claims about the noumenal world so its style often blurs into philosophy of language and introspective psychology. compared to system-building it can seem very dry stylistically similar to computer programming mathematics or even accountancy as a common stated goal is to account for entities in the world.citation needed



modern philosophy is philosophy developed in the modern era and associated with modernity. it is not a specific doctrine or school and thus should not be confused with modernism although there are certain assumptions common to much of it which helps to distinguish it from earlier philosophy.

the th and early th centuries roughly mark the beginning and the end of modern philosophy. how much of the renaissance should be included is a matter for dispute; likewise modernity may or may not have ended in the twentieth century and been replaced by postmodernity. how one decides these questions will determine the scope of ones use of the term modern philosophy.

how much of renaissance intellectual history is part of modern philosophy is disputed the early renaissance is often considered less modern and more medieval compared to the later high renaissance. by the th and th centuries the major figures in philosophy of mind epistemology and metaphysics were roughly divided into two main groups. the rationalists mostly in france and germany argued all knowledge must begin from certain innate ideas in the mind. major rationalists were descartes baruch spinoza gottfried leibniz and nicolas malebranche. the empiricists by contrast held that knowledge must begin with sensory experience. major figures in this line of thought are john locke george berkeley and david hume these are retrospective categories for which kant is largely responsible. ethics and political philosophy are usually not subsumed under these categories though all these philosophers worked in ethics in their own distinctive styles. other important figures in political philosophy include thomas hobbes and jean-jacques rousseau.

in the late eighteenth century immanuel kant set forth a groundbreaking philosophical system which claimed to bring unity to rationalism and empiricism. whether or not he was right he did not entirely succeed in ending philosophical dispute. kant sparked a storm of philosophical work in germany in the early nineteenth century beginning with german idealism. the characteristic theme of idealism was that the world and the mind equally must be understood according to the same categories; it culminated in the work of georg wilhelm friedrich hegel who among many other things said that the real is rational; the rational is real.

hegels work was carried in many directions by his followers and critics. karl marx appropriated both hegels philosophy of history and the empirical ethics dominant in britain transforming hegels ideas into a strictly materialist form setting the grounds for the development of a science of society. sren kierkegaard in contrast dismissed all systematic philosophy as an inadequate guide to life and meaning. for kierkegaard life is meant to be lived not a mystery to be solved. arthur schopenhauer took idealism to the conclusion that the world was nothing but the futile endless interplay of images and desires and advocated atheism and pessimism. schopenhauers ideas were taken up and transformed by nietzsche who seized upon their various dismissals of the world to proclaim god is dead and to reject all systematic philosophy and all striving for a fixed truth transcending the individual. nietzsche found in this not grounds for pessimism but the possibility of a new kind of freedom.

th-century british philosophy came increasingly to be dominated by strands of neo-hegelian thought and as a reaction against this figures such as bertrand russell and george edward moore began moving in the direction of analytic philosophy which was essentially an updating of traditional empiricism to accommodate the new developments in logic of the german mathematician gottlob frege.

renaissance humanism emphasized the value of human beings see oration on the dignity of man and opposed dogma and scholasticism. this new interest in human activities led to the development of political science with the prince of niccol machiavelli. humanists differed from medieval scholars also because they saw the natural world as mathematically ordered and pluralistic instead of thinking of it in terms of purposes and goals. renaissance philosophy is perhaps best explained by two propositions made by leonardo da vinci in his notebooks

all of our knowledge has its origins in our perceptions
there is no certainty where one can neither apply any of the mathematical sciences nor any of those which are based upon the mathematical sciences.
in a similar way galileo galilei based his scientific method on experiments but also developed mathematical methods for application to problems in physics. these two ways to conceive human knowledge formed the background for the principle of empiricism and rationalism respectively.

modern philosophy traditionally begins with ren descartes and his dictum i think therefore i am. in the early seventeenth century the bulk of philosophy was dominated by scholasticism written by theologians and drawing upon plato aristotle and early church writings. descartes argued that many predominant scholastic metaphysical doctrines were meaningless or false. in short he proposed to begin philosophy from scratch. in his most important work meditations on first philosophy he attempts just this over six brief essays. he tries to set aside as much as he possibly can of all his beliefs to determine what if anything he knows for certain. he finds that he can doubt nearly everything the reality of physical objects god his memories history science even mathematics but he cannot doubt that he is in fact doubting. he knows what he is thinking about even if it is not true and he knows that he is there thinking about it. from this basis he builds his knowledge back up again. he finds that some of the ideas he has could not have originated from him alone but only from god; he proves that god exists. he then demonstrates that god would not allow him to be systematically deceived about everything; in essence he vindicates ordinary methods of science and reasoning as fallible but not false.

empiricism is a theory of knowledge which opposes other theories of knowledge such as rationalism idealism and historicism. empiricism asserts that knowledge comes only or primarily via sensory experience as opposed to rationalism which asserts that knowledge comes also from pure thinking. both empiricism and rationalism are individualist theories of knowledge whereas historicism is a social epistemology. while historicism also acknowledges the role of experience it differs from empiricism by assuming that sensory data cannot be understood without considering the historical and cultural circumstances in which observations are made. empiricism should not be mixed up with empirical research because different epistemologies should be considered competing views on how best to do studies and there is near consensus among researchers that studies should be empirical. today empiricism should therefore be understood as one among competing ideals of getting knowledge or how to do studies. as such empiricism is first and foremost characterized by the ideal to let observational data speak for themselves while the competing views are opposed to this ideal. the term empiricism should thus not just be understood in relation to how this term has been used in the history of philosophy. it should also be constructed in a way which makes it possible to distinguish empiricism among other epistemological positions in contemporary science and scholarship. in other words empiricism as a concept has to be constructed along with other concepts which together make it possible to make important discriminations between different ideals underlying contemporary science.

empiricism is one of several competing views that predominate in the study of human knowledge known as epistemology. empiricism emphasizes the role of experience and evidence especially sensory perception in the formation of ideas over the notion of innate ideas or tradition in contrast to for example rationalism which relies upon reason and can incorporate innate knowledge.

political philosophy is the study of such topics as politics liberty justice property rights law and the enforcement of a legal code by authority what they are why or even if they are needed what if anything makes a government legitimate what rights and freedoms it should protect and why what form it should take and why what the law is and what duties citizens owe to a legitimate government if any and when it may be legitimately overthrownif ever. in a vernacular sense the term political philosophy often refers to a general view or specific ethic political belief or attitude about politics that does not necessarily belong to the technical discipline of philosophy.

idealism refers to the group of philosophies which assert that reality or reality as we can know it is fundamentally a construct of the mind or otherwise immaterial. epistemologically idealism manifests as a skepticism about the possibility of knowing any mind-independent thing. in a sociological sense idealism emphasizes how human ideasespecially beliefs and valuesshape society. as an ontological doctrine idealism goes further asserting that all entities are composed of mind or spirit. idealism thus rejects physicalist and dualist theories that fail to ascribe priority to the mind. an extreme version of this idealism can exist in the philosophical notion of solipsism.

existentialism is generally considered to be the philosophical and cultural movement which holds that the starting point of philosophical thinking must be the individual and the experiences of the individual. building on that existentialists hold that moral thinking and scientific thinking together do not suffice to understand human existence and therefore a further set of categories governed by the norm of authenticity is necessary to understand human existence.

phenomenology is the study of the structure of experience. it is a broad philosophical movement founded in the early years of the th century by edmund husserl expanded upon by a circle of his followers at the universities of gttingen and munich in germany. the philosophy then spread to france the united states and elsewhere often in contexts far removed from husserls early work.


pragmatism is a philosophical tradition centered on the linking of practice and theory. it describes a process where theory is extracted from practice and applied back to practice to form what is called intelligent practice.citation needed important positions characteristic of pragmatism include instrumentalism radical empiricism verificationism conceptual relativity and fallibilism.citation needed there is general consensus among pragmatists that philosophy should take the methods and insights of modern science into account. charles sanders peirce and his pragmatic maxim deserves most of the credit for pragmatism along with later twentieth century contributors william james and john dewey.

analytic philosophy came to dominate english-speaking countries in the th century. in the united states united kingdom canada scandinavia australia and new zealand the overwhelming majority of university philosophy departments identify themselves as analytic departments. the term generally refers to a broad philosophical tradition characterized by an emphasis on clarity and argument often achieved via modern formal logic and analysis of language and a respect for the natural sciences.

various philosophical movements in asia arose in the modern period including

liberty enlightening the world known as the statue of liberty was donated to the us by france in  as an artistic personification of liberty.
broadly speaking liberty is the ability to do as one pleases. it is a synonym for the word freedom. in modern politics liberty is the state of being free within society from oppressive restrictions imposed by authority on ones way of life behaviour or political views. in philosophy liberty involves free will as contrasted with determinism. in theology liberty is freedom from the effects of sin spiritual servitude or worldly ties. sometimes liberty is differentiated from freedom by using the word freedom primarily if not exclusively to mean the ability to do as one wills and what one has the power to do; and using the word liberty to mean the absence of arbitrary restraints taking into account the rights of all involved. in this sense the exercise of liberty is subject to capability and limited by the rights of others. thus liberty entails the responsible use of freedom under the rule of law without depriving anyone else of their freedom. freedom is more broad in that it represents a total lack of restraint or the unrestrained ability to fulfill ones desires. for example a person can have the freedom to murder but not have the liberty to murder as the latter example deprives others of their right not to be harmed. liberty can be taken away as a form of punishment. in many countries people can be deprived of their liberty if they are convicted of criminal acts.

the word liberty is often used in slogans such as life liberty and the pursuit of happiness or liberty equality fraternity.

liberty originates from the latin word libertas derived from the name of the goddess libertas who along with the goddess of liberty usually portrays the concept and the archaic roman god liber.


philosophers from earliest times have considered the question of liberty. roman emperor marcus aurelius  ad wrote

a polity in which there is the same law for all a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed.


a free man is he that in those things which by his strength and wit he is able to do is not hindered to do what he hath the will to do.

john locke  rejected that definition of liberty. while not specifically mentioning hobbes he attacks sir robert filmer who had the same definition. according to locke

in the state of nature liberty consists of being free from any superior power on earth. people are not under the will or lawmaking authority of others but have only the law of nature for their rule. in political society liberty consists of being under no other lawmaking power except that established by consent in the commonwealth. people are free from the dominion of any will or legal restraint apart from that enacted by their own constituted lawmaking power according to the trust put in it. thus freedom is not as sir robert filmer defines it a liberty for everyone to do what he likes to live as he pleases and not to be tied by any laws. freedom is constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political society. freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature. freedom of people under government is to be under no restraint apart from standing rules to live by that are common to everyone in the society and made by the lawmaking power established in it. persons have a right or liberty to  follow their own will in all things that the law has not prohibited and  not be subject to the inconstant uncertain unknown and arbitrary wills of others.


john stuart mill  in his work on liberty was the first to recognize the difference between liberty as the freedom to act and liberty as the absence of coercion.

in his book two concepts of liberty isaiah berlin formally framed the differences between two perspectives as the distinction between two opposite concepts of liberty positive liberty and negative liberty. the latter designates a negative condition in which an individual is protected from tyranny and the arbitrary exercise of authority while the former refers to the liberty that comes from self-mastery the freedom from inner compulsions such as weakness and fear.

the magna carta originally known as the charter of liberties of  written in iron gall ink on parchment in medieval latin using standard abbreviations of the period. this document is held at the british library and is identified as british library cotton ms augustus ii..
history

a romanticised th-century recreation of king john signing the magna carta. the charter would have been sealed rather than signed.
the modern concept of political liberty has its origins in the greek concepts of freedom and slavery. to be free to the greeks was not to have a master to be independent from a master to live as one likes. that was the original greek concept of freedom. it is closely linked with the concept of democracy as aristotle put it

this then is one note of liberty which all democrats affirm to be the principle of their state. another is that a man should live as he likes. this they say is the privilege of a freeman since on the other hand not to live as a man likes is the mark of a slave. this is the second characteristic of democracy whence has arisen the claim of men to be ruled by none if possible or if this is impossible to rule and be ruled in turns; and so it contributes to the freedom based upon equality.
this applied only to free men. in athens for instance women could not vote or hold office and were legally and socially dependent on a male relative.

the populations of the persian empire enjoyed some degree of freedom. citizens of all religions and ethnic groups were given the same rights and had the same freedom of religion women had the same rights as men and slavery was abolished  bc. all the palaces of the kings of persia were built by paid workers in an era when slaves typically did such work.

in the maurya empire of ancient india citizens of all religions and ethnic groups had some rights to freedom tolerance and equality. the need for tolerance on an egalitarian basis can be found in the edicts of ashoka the great which emphasize the importance of tolerance in public policy by the government. the slaughter or capture of prisoners of war also appears to have been condemned by ashoka. slavery also appears to have been non-existent in the maurya empire. however according to hermann kulke and dietmar rothermund ashokas orders seem to have been resisted right from the beginning.

roman law also embraced certain limited forms of liberty even under the rule of the roman emperors. however these liberties were accorded only to roman citizens. many of the liberties enjoyed under roman law endured through the middle ages but were enjoyed solely by the nobility rarely by the common man.citation needed the idea of inalienable and universal liberties had to wait until the age of enlightenment.


in french liberty. british slavery  james gillray caricatured french liberty as the opportunity to starve and british slavery as bloated complaints about taxation.
the social contract theory most influentially formulated by hobbes john locke and rousseau though first suggested by plato in the republic was among the first to provide a political classification of rights in particular through the notion of sovereignty and of natural rights. the thinkers of the enlightenment reasoned that law governed both heavenly and human affairs and that law gave the king his power rather than the kings power giving force to law. this conception of law would find its culmination in the ideas of montesquieu. the conception of law as a relationship between individuals rather than families came to the fore and with it the increasing focus on individual liberty as a fundamental reality given by nature and natures god which in the ideal state would be as universal as possible.

in on liberty john stuart mill sought to define the ...nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual and as such he describes an inherent and continuous antagonism between liberty and authority and thus the prevailing question becomes how to make the fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control.

england and following the act of union  great britain laid down the cornerstones of the concept of individual liberty.

in  as a condition of his coronation william the conqueror assented to the london charter of liberties which guaranteed the saxon liberties of the city of london.

in  the charter of liberties is passed which sets out certain liberties of nobles church officials and individuals.

in  henry ii of england transformed english law by passing the assize of clarendon. the act a forerunner to trial by jury started the abolition of trial by combat and trial by ordeal.

- sees the publication of tractatus de legibus et consuetudinibus regni anglie which contains authoritative definitions of freedom and servitude

freedom is the natural faculty of doing what each person pleases to do according to his will except what is prohibited to him of right or by force. sevitude on the other hand may be said to be the contrary as if any person contrary to freedom should be bound upon a covenant to do something or not to do it.

in  magna carta was enacted arguably becoming the cornerstone of liberty in first england then great britain and later the world.

in  the english parliament passed the petition of right which set out specific liberties of english subjects.

in  the english parliament passed the habeas corpus act which outlawed unlawful or arbitrary imprisonment.

in  the bill of rights granted freedom of speech in parliament and reinforced many existing civil rights in england. the scots law equivalent the claim of right is also passed.

in  the somerset v stewart judgement found that slavery was unsupported by common law in england and wales.

in  an essay by the philosopher john stuart mill entitled on liberty argued for toleration and individuality. if any opinion is compelled to silence that opinion may for aught we can certainly know be true. to deny this is to assume our own infallibility.

in  two concepts of liberty by isaiah berlin identified negative liberty as an obstacle as distinct from positive liberty which promotes self-mastery and the concepts of freedom.

in  british representatives attempted to but were prevented from adding a legal framework to the universal declaration of human rights. it was not until  that the international covenant on civil and political rights came into force giving a legal status to most of the declaration.

the depiction of liberty on the walking liberty half dollar.
according to the  united states declaration of independence all men have a natural right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness. but this declaration of liberty was troubled from the outset by the institutionalization of legalized black slavery. slave owners argued that their liberty was paramount since it involved property their slaves and that blacks had no rights that any white man was obliged to recognize. the supreme court in the dred scott decision upheld this principle. it was not until  following the civil war that the us constitution was amended to extend these rights to persons of color and not until  that these rights were extended to women.

by the later half of the th century liberty was expanded further to prohibit government interference with personal choices. in the united states supreme court decision griswold v. connecticut justice william o. douglas argued that liberties relating to personal relationships such as marriage have a unique primacy of place in the hierarchy of freedoms. jacob m. appel has summarized this principle

i am grateful that i have rights in the proverbial public square  but as a practical matter my most cherished rights are those that i possess in my bedroom and hospital room and death chamber. most people are far more concerned that they can control their own bodies than they are about petitioning congress.

in modern america various competing ideologies have divergent views about how best to promote liberty. liberals in the original sense of the word see equality as a necessary component of freedom. progressives stress freedom from business monopoly as essential. libertarians disagree and see economic freedom as best. the tea party movement sees the undefined big government as the enemy of freedom.

france supported the americans in their revolt against english rule and in  overthrew their own monarchy with the cry of libert galit fraternit. the bloodbath that followed known as the reign of terror soured many people on the idea of liberty. edmund burke considered one of the fathers of conservatism wrote the french had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world.

according to the concise oxford dictionary of politics liberalism is the belief that it is the aim of politics to preserve individual rights and to maximize freedom of choice. but they point out that there is considerable discussion about how to achieve those goals. every discussion of freedom depends on three key components who is free what they are free to do and what forces restrict their freedom. john gray argues that the core belief of liberalism is toleration. liberals allow others freedom to do what they want in exchange for having the same freedom in return. this idea of freedom is personal rather than political. william safire points out that liberalism is attacked by both the right and the left by the right for defending such practices as abortion homosexuality and atheism and by the left for defending free enterprise and the rights of the individual over the collective.

socialists view freedom as a concrete situation as opposed to a purely abstract ideal. freedom is a state of being where individuals have agency to pursue their creative interests unhindered by coercive social relationships specifically those they are forced to engage in as a requisite for survival under a given social system. freedom thus requires both the material economic conditions that make freedom possible alongside social relationships and institutions conducive to freedom.

the socialist conception of freedom is closely related to the socialist view of creativity and individuality. influenced by karl marxs concept of alienated labor socialists understand freedom to be the ability for an individual to engage in creative work in the absence of alienation where alienated labor refers to work people are forced to perform and un-alienated work refers to individuals pursuing their own creative interests.


for karl marx meaningful freedom is only attainable in a communist society characterized by superabundance and free access. such a social arrangement would eliminate the need for alienated labor and enable individuals to pursue their own creative interests leaving them to develop and maximize their full potentialities. this goes alongside marxs emphasis on the ability of socialism and communism progressively reducing the average length of the workday to expand the realm of freedom or discretionary free time for each person. marxs notion of communist society and human freedom is thus radically individualistic.


while many anarchists see freedom slightly differently all oppose authority including the authority of the state of capitalism and of nationalism. for the russian revolutionary anarchist mikhail bakunin liberty did not mean an abstract ideal but a concrete reality based on the equal liberty of others. in a positive sense liberty consists of the fullest development of all the faculties and powers of every human being by education by scientific training and by material prosperity. such a conception of liberty is eminently social because it can only be realized in society not in isolation. in a negative sense liberty is the revolt of the individual against all divine collective and individual authority.

some authors have suggested that a virtuous culture must exist as a prerequisite for liberty. benjamin franklin stated that only a virtuous people are capable of freedom. as nations become corrupt and vicious they have more need of masters. madison likewise declared to suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people is a chimerical idea. john adams acknowledged our constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. it is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.

j
authority
from wikipedia the free encyclopedia
jump to navigationjump to search
this article is about authority as a political concept. for other uses see authority disambiguation.
authority is the legitimate power which one person or group possesses and practices over another. a civil state usually makes this formal by way of a judicial branch and an executive branch of government. in the exercise of governance the terms authority and power sometimes are inaccurately used as synonyms. the term authority identifies political legitimacy which grants and justifies the right to exercise power of government; and the term power identifies the ability to accomplish an authorized goal by way either of compliance or of obedience; hence authority is the power to make decisions and the legitimacy to make such legal decisions and order their execution.

ancient understandings of authority trace back to rome and draw later from catholic thomistic thought and other traditional understandings. in more modern terms forms of authority include transitional authority exhibited in for example cambodia public authority in the form of popular power and in more administrative terms bureaucratic or managerial techniques. in terms of bureaucratic governance one limitation of the governmental agents of the executive branch as outlined by george a. krause is that they are not as close to the popular will as elected representatives are. the claims of authority can extend to national or individual sovereignty which is broadly or provisionally understood as a claim to political authority that is legitimated.

historical applications of authority in political terms include the formation of the city-state of geneva and experimental treatises involving the topic of authority in relation to education include emile by jean-jacques rousseau. as david laitin defines authority is a key concept to be defined in determining the range and role of political theory science and inquiry. the relevance of a grounded understanding of authority includes the basic foundation and formation of political civil and/or ecclesiastical institutions or representatives. in recent years however authority in political contexts has been challenged or questioned.

political philosophy
there have been several contributions to the debate of political authority. among others hannah arendt carl joachim friedrich thomas hobbes alexandre kojve and carl schmitt have provided some of the most remarkable texts.

in political philosophy the jurisdiction of political authority the location of sovereignty the balancing of freedom and authority and the requirements of political obligations have been core questions from the time of plato and aristotle to the present. most democratic societies are engaged in an ongoing discussion regarding the legitimate extent of the exercise of governmental authority. in the united states for instance there is a prevailing belief that the political system as instituted by the founding fathers should accord the populace as much freedom as reasonable and that government should limit its authority accordingly known as limited government.

in the discussion regarding the legitimacy of political authority there are two beliefs at the respective ends of the spectrum. the first is the belief in the absolute freedom of the individual otherwise known as political anarchism. the second is the belief that there must be a central authority in the form of a sovereign that claims ownership and control over the masses. this belief is known as statism. sovereignty in modern terms can refer either to the adherence to a form of sovereign rule or the individual sovereignty or autonomy of a nation-state. the argument for political anarchy and anti-statism is made by michael huemer in his book the problem of political authority. on the other side one of the main arguments for the legitimacy of the state is some form of the social contract theory developed by thomas hobbes in his  book leviathan or by jean-jacques rousseau in his political writings on the social contract.

sociology
since the emergence of the social sciences authority has become a subject of research in a variety of empirical settings the family parental authority small groups informal authority of leadership intermediate organizations such as schools churches armies industries and bureaucracies organizational and bureaucratic authority and society-wide or inclusive organizations ranging from the most primitive tribal society to the modern nation-state and intermediate organization political authority.

the definition of authority in contemporary social science remains a matter of debate. max weber in his essay politics as a vocation  divided legitimate authority into three types. others like howard bloom suggest a parallel between authority and respect/reverence for ancestors.

the united kingdom and the commonwealth realms
the political authority in the british context can be traced to james vi and i of scotland who wrote two political treatise called basilikon doron and the trve lawe of free monarchies or the reciprock and mvtvall dvtie betwixt a free king and his naturall subiectes which advocated his right to rule on the basis of the concept of the divine right of kings a theological concept that has basis in multiple religions but in this case christianity tracing this right to the apostolic succession. the king in the united kingdom and the commonwealth states are considered the foundations of judicial legislative and executive authority.

the united states
the understanding of political authority and the exercise of political powers in the american context traces back to the writings of the founding fathers including the arguments put forward in the federalist papers by james madison alexander hamilton and the first chief justice of the united states john jay and later speeches by the th president of the united states abraham lincoln. our government rests in public opinion president abraham lincoln said in . in his  speech at peoria illinois lincoln espoused the proposition that each man should do precisely as he pleases with all which is exclusively his own a principle existing at the foundation of the sense of justice. this sense of personal ownership and stewardship was integral to the practice of self-government as abraham lincoln saw it by a republican nation and its people. this was because as abraham lincoln also declared no man is good enough to govern another man without that others consent.





reason is the capacity of consciously making sense of things applying logic and adapting or justifying practices institutions and beliefs based on new or existing information. it is closely associated with such characteristically human activities as philosophy science language mathematics and art and is normally considered to be a distinguishing ability possessed by humans. reason is sometimes referred to as rationality.

reasoning is associated with thinking cognition and intellect. the field of logic studies ways in which humans reason formally through argument. reasoning may be subdivided into forms of logical reasoning such as deductive reasoning inductive reasoning and abductive reasoning. aristotle drew a distinction between logical discursive reasoning reason proper and intuitive reasoning in which the reasoning process through intuitionhowever validmay tend toward the personal and the subjectively opaque. in some social and political settings logical and intuitive modes of reasoning may clash while in other contexts intuition and formal reason are seen as complementary rather than adversarial. for example in mathematics intuition is often necessary for the creative processes involved with arriving at a formal proof arguably the most difficult of formal reasoning tasks.

reasoning like habit or intuition is one of the ways by which thinking moves from one idea to a related idea. for example reasoning is the means by which rational individuals understand sensory information from their environments or conceptualize abstract dichotomies such as cause and effect truth and falsehood or ideas regarding notions of good or evil. reasoning as a part of executive decision making is also closely identified with the ability to self-consciously change in terms of goals beliefs attitudes traditions and institutions and therefore with the capacity for freedom and self-determination.

in contrast to the use of reason as an abstract noun a reason is a consideration given which either explains or justifies events phenomena or behavior. reasons justify decisions reasons support explanations of natural phenomena; reasons can be given to explain the actions conduct of individuals.

using reason or reasoning can also be described more plainly as providing good or the best reasons. for example when evaluating a moral decision morality is at the very least the effort to guide ones conduct by reasonthat is doing what there are the best reasons for doingwhile giving equal and impartial weight to the interests of all those affected by what one does.

psychologists and cognitive scientists have attempted to study and explain how people reason e.g. which cognitive and neural processes are engaged and how cultural factors affect the inferences that people draw. the field of automated reasoning studies how reasoning may or may not be modeled computationally. animal psychology considers the question of whether animals other than humans can reason.


in the english language and other modern european languages reason and related words represent words which have always been used to translate latin and classical greek terms in the sense of their philosophical usage.

the original greek term was  logos the root of the modern english word logic but also a word which could mean for example speech or explanation or an account of money handled.
as a philosophical term logos was translated in its non-linguistic senses in latin as ratio. this was originally not just a translation used for philosophy but was also commonly a translation for logos in the sense of an account of money.
french raison is derived directly from latin and this is the direct source of the english word reason.
the earliest major philosophers to publish in english such as francis bacon thomas hobbes and john locke also routinely wrote in latin and french and compared their terms to greek treating the words logos ratio raison and reason as interchangeable. the meaning of the word reason in senses such as human reason also overlaps to a large extent with rationality and the adjective of reason in philosophical contexts is normally rational rather than reasoned or reasonable. some philosophers thomas hobbes for example also used the word ratiocination as a synonym for reasoning.

francisco de goya the sleep of reason produces monsters el sueo de la razn produce monstruos c. 
the proposal that reason gives humanity a special position in nature has been argued to be a defining characteristic of western philosophy and later western modern science starting with classical greece. philosophy can be described as a way of life based upon reason and in the other direction reason has been one of the major subjects of philosophical discussion since ancient times. reason is often said to be reflexive or self-correcting and the critique of reason has been a persistent theme in philosophy. it has been defined in different ways at different times by different thinkers about human nature.

for many classical philosophers nature was understood teleologically meaning that every type of thing had a definitive purpose which fit within a natural order that was itself understood to have aims. perhaps starting with pythagoras or heraclitus the cosmos is even said to have reason. reason by this account is not just one characteristic that humans happen to have and that influences happiness amongst other characteristics. reason was considered of higher stature than other characteristics of human nature such as sociability because it is something humans share with nature itself linking an apparently immortal part of the human mind with the divine order of the cosmos itself. within the human mind or soul psyche reason was described by plato as being the natural monarch which should rule over the other parts such as spiritedness thumos and the passions. aristotle platos student defined human beings as rational animals emphasizing reason as a characteristic of human nature. he defined the highest human happiness or well being eudaimonia as a life which is lived consistently excellently and completely in accordance with reason.

the conclusions to be drawn from the discussions of aristotle and plato on this matter are amongst the most debated in the history of philosophy. but teleological accounts such as aristotles were highly influential for those who attempt to explain reason in a way which is consistent with monotheism and the immortality and divinity of the human soul. for example in the neo-platonist account of plotinus the cosmos has one soul which is the seat of all reason and the souls of all individual humans are part of this soul. reason is for plotinus both the provider of form to material things and the light which brings individuals souls back into line with their source. such neo-platonist accounts of the rational part of the human soul were standard amongst medieval islamic philosophers and under this influence mainly via averroes came to be debated seriously in europe until well into the renaissance and they remain important in iranian philosophy.

subject-centred reason in early modern philosophy
the early modern era was marked by a number of significant changes in the understanding of reason starting in europe. one of the most important of these changes involved a change in the metaphysical understanding of human beings. scientists and philosophers began to question the teleological understanding of the world. nature was no longer assumed to be human-like with its own aims or reason and human nature was no longer assumed to work according to anything other than the same laws of nature which affect inanimate things. this new understanding eventually displaced the previous world view that derived from a spiritual understanding of the universe.


accordingly in the th century ren descartes explicitly rejected the traditional notion of humans as rational animals suggesting instead that they are nothing more than thinking things along the lines of other things in nature. any grounds of knowledge outside that understanding was therefore subject to doubt.

in his search for a foundation of all possible knowledge descartes deliberately decided to throw into doubt all knowledge  except that of the mind itself in the process of thinking

at this time i admit nothing that is not necessarily true. i am therefore precisely nothing but a thinking thing; that is a mind or intellect or understanding or reason  words of whose meanings i was previously ignorant.

this eventually became known as epistemological or subject-centred reason because it is based on the knowing subject who perceives the rest of the world and itself as a set of objects to be studied and successfully mastered by applying the knowledge accumulated through such study. breaking with tradition and many thinkers after him descartes explicitly did not divide the incorporeal soul into parts such as reason and intellect describing them as one indivisible incorporeal entity.

a contemporary of descartes thomas hobbes described reason as a broader version of addition and subtraction which is not limited to numbers. this understanding of reason is sometimes termed calculative reason. similar to descartes hobbes asserted that no discourse whatsoever can end in absolute knowledge of fact past or to come but that sense and memory is absolute knowledge.

in the late th century through the th century john locke and david hume developed descartes line of thought still further. hume took it in an especially skeptical direction proposing that there could be no possibility of deducing relationships of cause and effect and therefore no knowledge is based on reasoning alone even if it seems otherwise.

hume famously remarked that we speak not strictly and philosophically when we talk of the combat of passion and of reason. reason is and ought only to be the slave of the passions and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them. hume also took his definition of reason to unorthodox extremes by arguing unlike his predecessors that human reason is not qualitatively different from either simply conceiving individual ideas or from judgments associating two ideas and that reason is nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our souls which carries us along a certain train of ideas and endows them with particular qualities according to their particular situations and relations. it followed from this that animals have reason only much less complex than human reason.

in the th century immanuel kant attempted to show that hume was wrong by demonstrating that a transcendental self or i was a necessary condition of all experience. therefore suggested kant on the basis of such a self it is in fact possible to reason both about the conditions and limits of human knowledge. and so long as these limits are respected reason can be the vehicle of morality justice aesthetics theories of knowledge epistemology and understanding.

in the formulation of kant who wrote some of the most influential modern treatises on the subject the great achievement of reason german vernunft is that it is able to exercise a kind of universal law-making. kant was able therefore to reformulate the basis of moral-practical theoretical and aesthetic reasoning on universal laws.

here practical reasoning is the self-legislating or self-governing formulation of universal norms and theoretical reasoning the way humans posit universal laws of nature.

under practical reason the moral autonomy or freedom of human beings depends on their ability to behave according to laws that are given to them by the proper exercise of that reason. this contrasted with earlier forms of morality which depended on religious understanding and interpretation or nature for their substance.

according to kant in a free society each individual must be able to pursue their goals however they see fit so long as their actions conform to principles given by reason. he formulated such a principle called the categorical imperative which would justify an action only if it could be universalized

act only according to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law.

in contrast to hume then kant insists that reason itself german vernunft has natural ends itself the solution to the metaphysical problems especially the discovery of the foundations of morality. kant claimed that this problem could be solved with his transcendental logic which unlike normal logic is not just an instrument which can be used indifferently as it was for aristotle but a theoretical science in its own right and the basis of all the others.

according to jrgen habermas the substantive unity of reason has dissolved in modern times such that it can no longer answer the question how should i live instead the unity of reason has to be strictly formal or procedural. he thus described reason as a group of three autonomous spheres on the model of kants three critiques

cognitiveinstrumental reason is the kind of reason employed by the sciences. it is used to observe events to predict and control outcomes and to intervene in the world on the basis of its hypotheses;
moralpractical reason is what we use to deliberate and discuss issues in the moral and political realm according to universalizable procedures similar to kants categorical imperative; and
aesthetic reason is typically found in works of art and literature and encompasses the novel ways of seeing the world and interpreting things that those practices embody.
for habermas these three spheres are the domain of experts and therefore need to be mediated with the lifeworld by philosophers. in drawing such a picture of reason habermas hoped to demonstrate that the substantive unity of reason which in pre-modern societies had been able to answer questions about the good life could be made up for by the unity of reasons formalizable procedures.

hamann herder kant hegel kierkegaard nietzsche heidegger foucault rorty and many other philosophers have contributed to a debate about what reason means or ought to mean. some like kierkegaard nietzsche and rorty are skeptical about subject-centred universal or instrumental reason and even skeptical toward reason as a whole. others including hegel believe that it has obscured the importance of intersubjectivity or spirit in human life and attempt to reconstruct a model of what reason should be.

some thinkers e.g. foucault believe there are other forms of reason neglected but essential to modern life and to our understanding of what it means to live a life according to reason.

in the last several decades a number of proposals have been made to re-orient this critique of reason or to recognize the other voices or new departments of reason

for example in opposition to subject-centred reason habermas has proposed a model of communicative reason that sees it as an essentially cooperative activity based on the fact of linguistic intersubjectivity.

nikolas kompridis has proposed a widely encompassing view of reason as that ensemble of practices that contributes to the opening and preserving of openness in human affairs and a focus on reasons possibilities for social change.

the philosopher charles taylor influenced by the th century german philosopher martin heidegger has proposed that reason ought to include the faculty of disclosure which is tied to the way we make sense of things in everyday life as a new department of reason.

in the essay what is enlightenment michel foucault proposed a concept of critique based on kants distinction between private and public uses of reason. this distinction as suggested has two dimensions

private reason is the reason that is used when an individual is a cog in a machine or when one has a role to play in society and jobs to do to be a soldier to have taxes to pay to be in charge of a parish to be a civil servant.
public reason is the reason used when one is reasoning as a reasonable being and not as a cog in a machine when one is reasoning as a member of reasonable humanity. in these circumstances the use of reason must be free and public.

the terms logic or logical are sometimes used as if they were identical with the term reason or with the concept of being rational or sometimes logic is seen as the most pure or the defining form of reason. for example in modern economics rational choice is assumed to equate to logically consistent choice.

reason and logic can however be thought of as distinct although logic is one important aspect of reason. author douglas hofstadter in gdel escher bach characterizes the distinction in this way. logic is done inside a system while reason is done outside the system by such methods as skipping steps working backward drawing diagrams looking at examples or seeing what happens if you change the rules of the system.

reason is a type of thought and the word logic involves the attempt to describe rules or norms by which reasoning operates so that orderly reasoning can be taught. the oldest surviving writing to explicitly consider the rules by which reason operates are the works of the greek philosopher aristotle especially prior analysis and posterior analysis. although the ancient greeks had no separate word for logic as distinct from language and reason aristotles newly coined word syllogism syllogismos identified logic clearly for the first time as a distinct field of study. when aristotle referred to the logical h logik he was referring more broadly to rational thought.

reason compared to cause-and-effect thinking and symbolic thinking
main articles causality and symbols
as pointed out by philosophers such as hobbes locke and hume some animals are also clearly capable of a type of associative thinking even to the extent of associating causes and effects. a dog once kicked can learn how to recognize the warning signs and avoid being kicked in the future but this does not mean the dog has reason in any strict sense of the word. it also does not mean that humans acting on the basis of experience or habit are using their reason.

human reason requires more than being able to associate two ideas even if those two ideas might be described by a reasoning human as a cause and an effect perceptions of smoke for example and memories of fire. for reason to be involved the association of smoke and the fire would have to be thought through in a way which can be explained for example as cause and effect. in the explanation of locke for example reason requires the mental use of a third idea in order to make this comparison by use of syllogism.

more generally reason in the strict sense requires the ability to create and manipulate a system of symbols as well as indices and icons according to charles sanders peirce the symbols having only a nominal though habitual connection to either smoke or fire. one example of such a system of artificial symbols and signs is language.

the connection of reason to symbolic thinking has been expressed in different ways by philosophers. thomas hobbes described the creation of markes or notes of remembrance leviathan ch.  as speech. he used the word speech as an english version of the greek word logos so that speech did not need to be communicated. when communicated such speech becomes language and the marks or notes or remembrance are called signes by hobbes. going further back although aristotle is a source of the idea that only humans have reason logos he does mention that animals with imagination for whom sense perceptions can persist come closest to having something like reasoning and nous and even uses the word logos in one place to describe the distinctions which animals can perceive in such cases.

reason imagination mimesis and memory
main articles imagination mimesis memory and recollection
reason and imagination rely on similar mental processes. imagination is not only found in humans. aristotle for example stated that phantasia imagination that which can hold images or phantasmata and phronein a type of thinking that can judge and understand in some sense also exist in some animals. according to him both are related to the primary perceptive ability of animals which gathers the perceptions of different senses and defines the order of the things that are perceived without distinguishing universals and without deliberation or logos. but this is not yet reason because human imagination is different.

the recent modern writings of terrence deacon and merlin donald writing about the origin of language also connect reason connected to not only language but also mimesis. more specifically they describe the ability to create language as part of an internal modeling of reality specific to humankind. other results are consciousness and imagination or fantasy. in contrast modern proponents of a genetic predisposition to language itself include noam chomsky and steven pinker to whom donald and deacon can be contrasted.

as reason is symbolic thinking and peculiarly human then this implies that humans have a special ability to maintain a clear consciousness of the distinctness of icons or images and the real things they represent. starting with a modern author merlin donald writes

a dog might perceive the meaning of a fight that was realistically play-acted by humans but it could not reconstruct the message or distinguish the representation from its referent a real fight. ... trained apes are able to make this distinction; young children make this distinction early  hence their effortless distinction between play-acting an event and the event itself

in classical descriptions an equivalent description of this mental faculty is eikasia in the philosophy of plato. this is the ability to perceive whether a perception is an image of something else related somehow but not the same and therefore allows humans to perceive that a dream or memory or a reflection in a mirror is not reality as such. what klein refers to as dianoetic eikasia is the eikasia concerned specifically with thinking and mental images such as those mental symbols icons signes and marks discussed above as definitive of reason. explaining reason from this direction human thinking is special in the way that we often understand visible things as if they were themselves images of our intelligible objects of thought as foundations hypothses in ancient greek. this thinking dianoia is ...an activity which consists in making the vast and diffuse jungle of the visible world depend on a plurality of more precise nota.

both merlin donald and the socratic authors such as plato and aristotle emphasize the importance of mimesis often translated as imitation or representation. donald writes

imitation is found especially in monkeys and apes ... but ... mimesis is fundamentally different from imitation and mimicry in that it involves the invention of intentional representations. ... mimesis is not absolutely tied to external communication.

mimsis is a concept now popular again in academic discussion that was particularly prevalent in platos works and within aristotle it is discussed mainly in the poetics. in michael daviss account of the theory of man in this work.

it is the distinctive feature of human action that whenever we choose what we do we imagine an action for ourselves as though we were inspecting it from the outside. intentions are nothing more than imagined actions internalizings of the external. all action is therefore imitation of action; it is poetic...

donald like plato and aristotle especially in on memory and recollection emphasizes the peculiarity in humans of voluntary initiation of a search through ones mental world. the ancient greek anamnsis normally translated as recollection was opposed to mneme or memory. memory shared with some animals requires a consciousness not only of what happened in the past but also that something happened in the past which is in other words a kind of eikasia ...but nothing except man is able to recollect. recollection is a deliberate effort to search for and recapture something once known. klein writes that to become aware of our having forgotten something means to begin recollecting. donald calls the same thing autocueing which he explains as follows mimetic acts are reproducible on the basis of internal self-generated cues. this permits voluntary recall of mimetic representations without the aid of external cues  probably the earliest form of representational thinking.

in a celebrated paper in modern times the fantasy author and philologist j.r.r. tolkien wrote in his essay on fairy stories that the terms fantasy and enchantment are connected to not only ....the satisfaction of certain primordial human desires.... but also ...the origin of language and of the mind.

a subdivision of philosophy is logic. logic is the study of reasoning. looking at logical categorizations of different types of reasoning the traditional main division made in philosophy is between deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning. formal logic has been described as the science of deduction. the study of inductive reasoning is generally carried out within the field known as informal logic or critical thinking.

deduction is a form of reasoning in which a conclusion follows necessarily from the stated premises. a deduction is also the conclusion reached by a deductive reasoning process. one classic example of deductive reasoning is that found in syllogisms like the following

premise  all humans are mortal.
premise  socrates is a human.
conclusion socrates is mortal.
the reasoning in this argument is deductively valid because there is no way in which the premises  and  could be true and the conclusion  be false.

induction is a form of inference producing propositions about unobserved objects or types either specifically or generally based on previous observation. it is used to ascribe properties or relations to objects or types based on previous observations or experiences or to formulate general statements or laws based on limited observations of recurring phenomenal patterns.

inductive reasoning contrasts strongly with deductive reasoning in that even in the best or strongest cases of inductive reasoning the truth of the premises does not guarantee the truth of the conclusion. instead the conclusion of an inductive argument follows with some degree of probability. relatedly the conclusion of an inductive argument contains more information than is already contained in the premises. thus this method of reasoning is ampliative.

a classic example of inductive reasoning comes from the empiricist david hume

premise the sun has risen in the east every morning up until now.
conclusion the sun will also rise in the east tomorrow.
analogical reasoning
main article analogical reasoning
analogical reasoning is a form of inductive reasoning from a particular to a particular. it is often used in case-based reasoning especially legal reasoning. an example follows

premise  socrates is human and mortal.
premise  plato is human.
conclusion plato is mortal.
analogical reasoning is a weaker form of inductive reasoning from a single example because inductive reasoning typically uses a large number of examples to reason from the particular to the general. analogical reasoning often leads to wrong conclusions. for example

premise  socrates is human and male.
premise  ada lovelace is human.
conclusion therefore ada lovelace is male.

abductive reasoning or argument to the best explanation is a form of reasoning that doesnt fit in deductive or inductive since it starts with incomplete set of observations and proceeds with likely possible explanations so the conclusion in an abductive argument does not follow with certainty from its premises and concerns something unobserved. what distinguishes abduction from the other forms of reasoning is an attempt to favour one conclusion above others by subjective judgement or attempting to falsify alternative explanations or by demonstrating the likelihood of the favoured conclusion given a set of more or less disputable assumptions. for example when a patient displays certain symptoms there might be various possible causes but one of these is preferred above others as being more probable.

flawed reasoning in arguments is known as fallacious reasoning. bad reasoning within arguments can be because it commits either a formal fallacy or an informal fallacy.

formal fallacies occur when there is a problem with the form or structure of the argument. the word formal refers to this link to the form of the argument. an argument that contains a formal fallacy will always be invalid.

an informal fallacy is an error in reasoning that occurs due to a problem with the content rather than mere structure of the argument.

traditional problems raised concerning reason
philosophy is sometimes described as a life of reason with normal human reason pursued in a more consistent and dedicated way than usual. two categories of problem concerning reason have long been discussed by philosophers concerning reason essentially being reasonings about reasoning itself as a human aim or philosophizing about philosophizing. the first question is concerning whether we can be confident that reason can achieve knowledge of truth better than other ways of trying to achieve such knowledge. the other question is whether a life of reason a life that aims to be guided by reason can be expected to achieve a happy life more so than other ways of life whether such a life of reason results in knowledge or not.

since classical times a question has remained constant in philosophical debate which is sometimes seen as a conflict between movements called platonism and aristotelianism concerning the role of reason in confirming truth. people use logic deduction and induction to reach conclusions they think are true. conclusions reached in this way are considered according to aristotle more certain than sense perceptions on their own. on the other hand if such reasoned conclusions are only built originally upon a foundation of sense perceptions then our most logical conclusions can never be said to be certain because they are built upon the very same fallible perceptions they seek to better.

this leads to the question of what types of first principles or starting points of reasoning are available for someone seeking to come to true conclusions. in greek first principles are archai starting points and the faculty used to perceive them is sometimes referred to in aristotle and plato as nous which was close in meaning to awareness or consciousness.

empiricism sometimes associated with aristotle but more correctly associated with british philosophers such as john locke and david hume as well as their ancient equivalents such as democritus asserts that sensory impressions are the only available starting points for reasoning and attempting to attain truth. this approach always leads to the controversial conclusion that absolute knowledge is not attainable. idealism associated with plato and his school claims that there is a higher reality from which certain people can directly arrive at truth without needing to rely only upon the senses and that this higher reality is therefore the primary source of truth.

philosophers such as plato aristotle al-farabi avicenna averroes maimonides aquinas and hegel are sometimes said to have argued that reason must be fixed and discoverableperhaps by dialectic analysis or study. in the vision of these thinkers reason is divine or at least has divine attributes. such an approach allowed religious philosophers such as thomas aquinas and tienne gilson to try to show that reason and revelation are compatible. according to hegel ...the only thought which philosophy brings with it to the contemplation of history is the simple conception of reason; that reason is the sovereign of the world; that the history of the world therefore presents us with a rational process.

since the th century rationalists reason has often been taken to be a subjective faculty or rather the unaided ability pure reason to form concepts. for descartes spinoza and leibniz this was associated with mathematics. kant attempted to show that pure reason could form concepts time and space that are the conditions of experience. kant made his argument in opposition to hume who denied that reason had any role to play in experience.

reason versus emotion or passion
see also emotion and passion emotion
after plato and aristotle western literature often treated reason as being the faculty that trained the passions and appetites.citation needed stoic philosophy by contrast considered all passions undesirable.citation needed after the critiques of reason in the early enlightenment the appetites were rarely discussed or conflated with the passions.citation needed some enlightenment camps took after the stoics to say reason should oppose passion rather than order it while others like the romantics believed that passion displaces reason as in the maxim follow your heart.citation needed

reason has been seen as a slave or judge of the passions notably in the work of david hume and more recently of freud.citation needed reasoning which claims that the object of a desire is demanded by logic alone is called rationalization.citation needed

rousseau first proposed in his second discourse that reason and political life is not natural and possibly harmful to mankind. he asked what really can be said about what is natural to mankind. what other than reason and civil society best suits his constitution rousseau saw two principles prior to reason in human nature. first we hold an intense interest in our own well-being. secondly we object to the suffering or death of any sentient being especially one like ourselves. these two passions lead us to desire more than we could achieve. we become dependent upon each other and on relationships of authority and obedience. this effectively puts the human race into slavery. rousseau says that he almost dares to assert that nature does not destine men to be healthy. according to velkley rousseau outlines certain programs of rational self-correction most notably the political legislation of the contrat social and the moral education in mile. all the same rousseau understands such corrections to be only ameliorations of an essentially unsatisfactory condition that of socially and intellectually corrupted humanity.

this quandary presented by rousseau led to kants new way of justifying reason as freedom to create good and evil. these therefore are not to be blamed on nature or god. in various ways german idealism after kant and major later figures such nietzsche bergson husserl scheler and heidegger remain preoccupied with problems coming from the metaphysical demands or urges of reason. the influence of rousseau and these later writers is also large upon art and politics. many writers such as nikos kazantzakis extol passion and disparage reason. in politics modern nationalism comes from rousseaus argument that rationalist cosmopolitanism brings man ever further from his natural state.

another view on reason and emotion was proposed in the  book titled descartes error by antonio damasio. in it damasio presents the somatic marker hypothesis which states that emotions guide behavior and decision-making. damasio argues that these somatic markers known collectively as gut feelings are intuitive signals that direct our decision making processes in a certain way that cannot be solved with rationality alone. damasio further argues that rationality requires emotional input in order to function.

there are many religious traditions some of which are explicitly fideist and others of which claim varying degrees of rationalism. secular critics sometimes accuse all religious adherents of irrationality since they claim such adherents are guilty of ignoring suppressing or forbidding some kinds of reasoning concerning some subjects such as religious dogmas moral taboos etc.. though the theologies and religions such as classical monotheism typically do not claim to be irrational there is often a perceived conflict or tension between faith and tradition on the one hand and reason on the other as potentially competing sources of wisdom law and truth.

religious adherents sometimes respond by arguing that faith and reason can be reconciled or have different non-overlapping domains or that critics engage in a similar kind of irrationalism

reconciliation philosopher alvin plantinga argues that there is no real conflict between reason and classical theism because classical theism explains among other things why the universe is intelligible and why reason can successfully grasp it.
non-overlapping magisteria evolutionary biologist stephen jay gould argues that there need not be conflict between reason and religious belief because they are each authoritative in their own domain or magisterium. for example perhaps reason alone is not enough to explain such big questions as the origins of the universe the origin of life the origin of consciousness the foundation of morality or the destiny of the human race. if so reason can work on those problems over which it has authority while other sources of knowledge or opinion can have authority on the big questions.
tu quoque philosophers alasdair macintyre and charles taylor argue that those critics of traditional religion who are adherents of secular liberalism are also sometimes guilty of ignoring suppressing and forbidding some kinds of reasoning about subjects. similarly philosophers of science such as paul feyarabend argue that scientists sometimes ignore or suppress evidence contrary to the dominant paradigm.
unification theologian joseph ratzinger later benedict xvi asserted that christianity has understood itself as the religion of the logos as the religion according to reason referring to john      usually translated as in the beginning was the word logos. thus he said that the christian faith is open to all that is truly rational and that the rationality of western enlightenment is of christian origin.
some commentators have claimed that western civilization can be almost defined by its serious testing of the limits of tension between unaided reason and faith in revealed truthsfiguratively summarized as athens and jerusalem respectively. leo strauss spoke of a greater west that included all areas under the influence of the tension between greek rationalism and abrahamic revelation including the muslim lands. he was particularly influenced by the great muslim philosopher al-farabi. to consider to what extent eastern philosophy might have partaken of these important tensions strauss thought it best to consider whether dharma or tao may be equivalent to nature by which we mean physis in greek. according to strauss the beginning of philosophy involved the discovery or invention of nature and the pre-philosophical equivalent of nature was supplied by such notions as custom or ways which appear to be really universal in all times and places. the philosophical concept of nature or natures as a way of understanding archai first principles of knowledge brought about a peculiar tension between reasoning on the one hand and tradition or faith on the other.

although there is this special history of debate concerning reason and faith in the islamic christian and jewish traditions the pursuit of reason is sometimes argued to be compatible with the other practice of other religions of a different nature such as hinduism because they do not define their tenets in such an absolute way.

aristotle famously described reason with language as a part of human nature which means that it is best for humans to live politically meaning in communities of about the size and type of a small city state polis in greek. for example...

it is clear then that a human being is more of a political politikon = of the polis animal zion than is any bee or than any of those animals that live in herds. for nature as we say makes nothing in vain and humans are the only animals who possess reasoned speech logos. voice of course serves to indicate what is painful and pleasant; that is why it is also found in other animals because their nature has reached the point where they can perceive what is painful and pleasant and express these to each other. but speech logos serves to make plain what is advantageous and harmful and so also what is just and unjust. for it is a peculiarity of humans in contrast to the other animals to have perception of good and bad just and unjust and the like; and the community in these things makes a household or city polis. ... by nature then the drive for such a community exists in everyone but the first to set one up is responsible for things of very great goodness. for as humans are the best of all animals when perfected so they are the worst when divorced from law and right. the reason is that injustice is most difficult to deal with when furnished with weapons and the weapons a human being has are meant by nature to go along with prudence and virtue but it is only too possible to turn them to contrary uses. consequently if a human being lacks virtue he is the most unholy and savage thing and when it comes to sex and food the worst. but justice is something political to do with the polis for right is the arrangement of the political community and right is discrimination of what is just. aristotles politics a .. peter simpsons translation with greek terms inserted in square brackets.

the concept of human nature being fixed in this way implied in other words that we can define what type of community is always best for people. this argument has remained a central argument in all political ethical and moral thinking since then and has become especially controversial since firstly rousseaus second discourse and secondly the theory of evolution. already in aristotle there was an awareness that the polis had not always existed and had needed to be invented or developed by humans themselves. the household came first and the first villages and cities were just extensions of that with the first cities being run as if they were still families with kings acting like fathers.

friendship philia seems to prevail in man and woman according to nature kata phusin; for people are by nature ti phusei pairing sunduastikon more than political politikon = of the polis in as much as the household oikos is prior proteron = earlier and more necessary than the polis and making children is more common koinoteron with the animals. in the other animals community koinnia goes no further than this but people live together sumoikousin not only for the sake of making children but also for the things for life; for from the start the functions erga are divided and are different for man and woman. thus they supply each other putting their own into the common eis to koinon. it is for these reasons that both utility chrsimon and pleasure hdu seem to be found in this kind of friendship. nicomachean ethics viii..a. rough literal translation with greek terms shown in square brackets.

rousseau in his second discourse finally took the shocking step of claiming that this traditional account has things in reverse with reason language and rationally organized communities all having developed over a long period of time merely as a result of the fact that some habits of cooperation were found to solve certain types of problems and that once such cooperation became more important it forced people to develop increasingly complex cooperationoften only to defend themselves from each other.

in other words according to rousseau reason language and rational community did not arise because of any conscious decision or plan by humans or gods nor because of any pre-existing human nature. as a result he claimed living together in rationally organized communities like modern humans is a development with many negative aspects compared to the original state of man as an ape. if anything is specifically human in this theory it is the flexibility and adaptability of humans. this view of the animal origins of distinctive human characteristics later received support from charles darwins theory of evolution.

the two competing theories concerning the origins of reason are relevant to political and ethical thought because according to the aristotelian theory a best way of living together exists independently of historical circumstances. according to rousseau we should even doubt that reason language and politics are a good thing as opposed to being simply the best option given the particular course of events that lead to today. rousseaus theory that human nature is malleable rather than fixed is often taken to imply for example by karl marx a wider range of possible ways of living together than traditionally known.

however while rousseaus initial impact encouraged bloody revolutions against traditional politics including both the french revolution and the russian revolution his own conclusions about the best forms of community seem to have been remarkably classical in favor of city-states such as geneva and rural living.

scientific research into reasoning is carried out within the fields of psychology and cognitive science. psychologists attempt to determine whether or not people are capable of rational thought in a number of different circumstances.

assessing how well someone engages in reasoning is the project of determining the extent to which the person is rational or acts rationally. it is a key research question in the psychology of reasoning. rationality is often divided into its respective theoretical and practical counterparts.

behavioral experiments on human reasoning
experimental cognitive psychologists carry out research on reasoning behaviour. such research may focus for example on how people perform on tests of reasoning such as intelligence or iq tests or on how well peoples reasoning matches ideals set by logic see for example the wason test. experiments examine how people make inferences from conditionals e.g. if a then b and how they make inferences about alternatives e.g. a or else b. they test whether people can make valid deductions about spatial and temporal relations e.g. a is to the left of b or a happens after b and about quantified assertions e.g. all the a are b. experiments investigate how people make inferences about factual situations hypothetical possibilities probabilities and counterfactual situations.

developmental psychologists investigate the development of reasoning from birth to adulthood. piagets theory of cognitive development was the first complete theory of reasoning development. subsequently several alternative theories were proposed including the neo-piagetian theories of cognitive development.

the biological functioning of the brain is studied by neurophysiologists and neuropsychologists. research in this area includes research into the structure and function of normally functioning brains and of damaged or otherwise unusual brains. in addition to carrying out research into reasoning some psychologists for example clinical psychologists and psychotherapists work to alter peoples reasoning habits when they are unhelpful.


in artificial intelligence and computer science scientists study and use automated reasoning for diverse applications including automated theorem proving the formal semantics of programming languages and formal specification in software engineering.

meta-reasoning is reasoning about reasoning. in computer science a system performs meta-reasoning when it is reasoning about its own operation. this requires a programming language capable of reflection the ability to observe and modify its own structure and behaviour.

dan sperber believes that reasoning in groups is more effective and promotes their evolutionary fitness.
a species could benefit greatly from better abilities to reason about predict and understand the world. french social and cognitive scientists dan sperber and hugo mercier argue that there could have been other forces driving the evolution of reason. they point out that reasoning is very difficult for humans to do effectively and that it is hard for individuals to doubt their own beliefs confirmation bias. reasoning is most effective when it is done as a collective  as demonstrated by the success of projects like science. they suggest that there are not just individual but group selection pressures at play. any group that managed to find ways of reasoning effectively would reap benefits for all its members increasing their fitness. this could also help explain why humans according to sperber are not optimized to reason effectively alone. their argumentative theory of reasoning claims that reason may have more to do with winning arguments than with the search for the truth.

critical thinking is the analysis of facts to form a judgment. the subject is complex and several different definitions exist which generally include the rational skeptical unbiased analysis or evaluation of factual evidence. critical thinking is self-directed self-disciplined self-monitored and self-corrective thinking. it presupposes assent to rigorous standards of excellence and mindful command of their use. it entails effective communication and problem-solving abilities as well as a commitment to overcome native egocentrism and sociocentrism.

the earliest records of critical thinking are the teachings of socrates recorded by plato. these included a part in platos early dialogues where socrates engages with one or more interlocutors on the issue of ethics such as question whether it was right for socrates to escape from prison. the philosopher considered and reflected on this question and came to the conclusion that escape violates all the things that he holds higher than himself the laws of athens and the guiding voice that socrates claims to hear.

socrates established the fact that one cannot depend upon those in authority to have sound knowledge and insight. he demonstrated that persons may have power and high position and yet be deeply confused and irrational. socrates maintained that for an individual to have a good life or to have one that is worth living he must be critical questioner or must have an interrogative soul. he established the importance of asking deep questions that probe profoundly into thinking before we accept ideas as worthy of belief.

socrates established the importance of seeking evidence closely examining reasoning and assumptions analyzing basic concepts and tracing out implications not only of what is said but of what is done as well. his method of questioning is now known as socratic questioning and is the best known critical thinking teaching strategy. in his mode of questioning socrates highlighted the need for thinking for clarity and logical consistency. he asked people questions to reveal their irrational thinking or lack of reliable knowledge. socrates demonstrated that having authority does not ensure accurate knowledge. he established the method of questioning beliefs closely inspecting assumptions and relying on evidence and sound rationale. plato recorded socrates teachings and carried on the tradition of critical thinking. aristotle and subsequent greek skeptics refined socrates teachings using systematic thinking and asking questions to ascertain the true nature of reality beyond the way things appear from a glance.

socrates set the agenda for the tradition of critical thinking namely to reflectively question common beliefs and explanations carefully distinguishing beliefs that are reasonable and logical from those thathowever appealing to our native egocentrism however much they serve our vested interests however comfortable or comforting they may belack adequate evidence or rational foundation to warrant belief.

critical thinking was described by richard w. paul as a movement in two waves . the first wave of critical thinking is often referred to as a critical analysis that is clear rational thinking involving critique. its details vary amongst those who define it. according to barry k. beyer  critical thinking means making clear reasoned judgments. during the process of critical thinking ideas should be reasoned well thought out and judged. the u.s. national council for excellence in critical thinking defines critical thinking as the intellectually disciplined process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing applying analyzing synthesizing or evaluating information gathered from or generated by observation experience reflection reasoning or communication as a guide to belief and action.

in the term critical thinking the word critical grk.  = kritikos = critic derives from the word critic and implies a critique; it identifies the intellectual capacity and the means of judging of judgement for judging and of being able to discern. the intellectual roots of critical thinking are as ancient as its etymology traceable ultimately to the teaching practice and vision of socrates  years ago who discovered by a method of probing questioning that people could not rationally justify their confident claims to knowledge.

traditionally critical thinking has been variously defined as follows

the process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing applying analyzing synthesizing and evaluating information to reach an answer or conclusion
disciplined thinking that is clear rational open-minded and informed by evidence
purposeful self-regulatory judgment which results in interpretation analysis evaluation and inference as well as explanation of the evidential conceptual methodological criteriological or contextual considerations upon which that judgment is based
includes a commitment to using reason in the formulation of our beliefs
the skill and propensity to engage in an activity with reflective scepticism mcpeck 
thinking about ones thinking in a manner designed to organize and clarify raise the efficiency of and recognize errors and biases in ones own thinking. critical thinking is not hard thinking nor is it directed at solving problems other than improving ones own thinking. critical thinking is inward-directed with the intent of maximizing the rationality of the thinker. one does not use critical thinking to solve problemsone uses critical thinking to improve ones process of thinking.
an appraisal based on careful analytical evaluation
critical thinking is a type of thinking pattern that requires people to be reflective and pay attention to decision-making which guides their beliefs and actions. critical thinking allows people to deduct with more logic to process sophisticated information and to look at various sides of issues so that they can produce more solid conclusions.
critical thinking has seven critical features being inquisitive and curious being open-minded to different sides being able to think systematically being analytical being persistent to truth being confident about critical thinking itself and lastly being mature.
although critical thinking could be defined in several different ways there is a general agreement in its key componentthe desire to reach for a satisfactory result and this should be achieved by rational thinking and result-driven manner. halpern thinks that critical thinking firstly involves learned abilities such as problem-solving calculation and successful probability application. it also includes a tendency to engage the thinking process. in recent times stanovich believed that modern iq test could hardly measure the ability of critical thinking.
contemporary critical thinking scholars have expanded these traditional definitions to include qualities concepts and processes such as creativity imagination discovery reflection empathy connecting knowing feminist theory subjectivity ambiguity and inconclusiveness. some definitions of critical thinking exclude these subjective practices.

according to ennis critical thinking is the intellectually disciplined process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing applying analyzing synthesizing and/or evaluating information gathered from or generated by observation experience reflection reasoning or communication as a guide to belief and action. this definition ennis provided is highly agreed by harvey siegel peter facione and deanna kuhn.
according to the definition by ennis critical thinking requires a lot of attention and brain function. when critical thinking approach toward education it will help the students brain to be more function-able and understand texts differently.
critical thinking can be specifically identified into many different portions different fields of student requires different types of critical thinking. critical thinking provides more angles and perspectives upon the same material

the study of logical argumentation is relevant to the study of critical thinking. logic is concerned with the analysis of arguments including the appraisal of their correctness or incorrectness. in the field of epistemology critical thinking is considered to be logically correct thinking which allows for differentiation between logically true and logically false statements.

in first wave logical thinking the thinker is removed from the train of thought and the analysis of connections between concepts or points in thought is ostencibly free of any bias. in his essay beyond logicism in critical thinking kerry s. walters describes this ideology thus a logistic approach to critical thinking conveys the message to students that thinking is legitimate only when it conforms to the procedures of informal and to a lesser extent formal logic and that the good thinker necessarily aims for styles of examination and appraisal that are analytical abstract universal and objective. this model of thinking has become so entrenched in conventional academic wisdom that many educators accept it as canon. such principles are concomitant with the increasing dependence on a quantitative understanding of the world.

in the second wave of critical thinking authors consciously moved away from the logocentric mode of critical thinking characteristic of the first wave. although many scholars began to take a less exclusive view of what constitutes critical thinking rationality and logic remain widely accepted as essential bases for critical thinking. walters argues that exclusive logicism in the first wave sense is based on the unwarranted assumption that good thinking is reducible to logical thinking.

there are three types of logical reasoning. informally two kinds of logical reasoning can be distinguished in addition to formal deduction which are induction and abduction.

deduction
deduction is the conclusion drawn from the structure of an arguments premises by use of rules of inference formally those of propositional calculus. for example x is human and all humans have a face so x has a face.
induction
induction is drawing a conclusion from a pattern that is guaranteed by the strictness of the structure to which it applies. for example the sum of even integers is even. let {\displaystyle xyz\in \mathbb {z} }{\displaystyle xyz\in \mathbb {z} } then {\displaystyle xyz}{\displaystyle xyz} are even by definition. {\displaystyle x+y=x+y=z}{\displaystyle x+y=x+y=z} which is even; so summing two even numbers results in an even number.
abduction
abduction is drawing a conclusion using a heuristic that is likely but not inevitable given some foreknowledge. for example i observe sheep in a field and they appear white from my viewing angle so sheep are white. contrast with the deductive statement some sheep are white on at least one side.
critical thinking and rationality
kerry s. walters an emeritus philosophy professor from gettysburg college argues that rationality demands more than just logical or traditional methods of problem solving and analysis or what he calls the calculus of justification but also considers cognitive acts such as imagination conceptual creativity intuition and insight p. . these functions are focused on discovery on more abstract processes instead of linear rules-based approaches to problem-solving. the linear and non-sequential mind must both be engaged in the rational mind.

the ability to critically analyze an argumentto dissect structure and components thesis and reasonsis essential. but so is the ability to be flexible and consider non-traditional alternatives and perspectives. these complementary functions are what allow for critical thinking to be a practice encompassing imagination and intuition in cooperation with traditional modes of deductive inquiry.

functions
the list of core critical thinking skills includes observation interpretation analysis inference evaluation explanation and metacognition. according to reynolds  an individual or group engaged in a strong way of critical thinking gives due consideration to establish for instance

evidence through reality
context skills to isolate the problem from context
relevant criteria for making the judgment well
applicable methods or techniques for forming the judgment
applicable theoretical constructs for understanding the problem and the question at hand
in addition to possessing strong critical-thinking skills one must be disposed to engage problems and decisions using those skills. critical thinking employs not only logic but broad intellectual criteria such as clarity credibility accuracy precision relevance depth breadth significance and fairness.

critical thinking calls for the ability to

recognize problems to find workable means for meeting those problems
understand the importance of prioritization and order of precedence in problem-solving
gather and marshal pertinent relevant information
recognize unstated assumptions and values
comprehend and use language with accuracy clarity and discernment
interpret data to appraise evidence and evaluate arguments
recognize the existence or non-existence of logical relationships between propositions
draw warranted conclusions and generalizations
put to test the conclusions and generalizations at which one arrives
reconstruct ones patterns of beliefs on the basis of wider experience
render accurate judgments about specific things and qualities in everyday life
in sum

a persistent effort to examine any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the evidence that supports or refutes it and the further conclusions to which it tends.

the habits of mind that characterize a person strongly disposed toward critical thinking include a desire to follow reason and evidence wherever they may lead a systematic approach to problem solving inquisitiveness even-handedness and confidence in reasoning.

according to a definition analysis by kompf & bond  critical thinking involves problem solving decision making metacognition rationality rational thinking reasoning knowledge intelligence and also a moral component such as reflective thinking. critical thinkers therefore need to have reached a level of maturity in their development possess a certain attitude as well as a set of taught skills.

there is a postulation by some writers that the tendencies from habits of mind should be thought as virtues to demonstrate the characteristics of a critical thinker. these intellectual virtues are ethical qualities that encourage motivation to think in particular ways towards specific circumstances. however these virtues have also been criticized by skeptics who argue that there is lacking evidence for this specific mental basis that are causative to critical thinking.

edward m. glaser proposed that the ability to think critically involves three elements

an attitude of being disposed to consider in a thoughtful way the problems and subjects that come within the range of ones experiences
knowledge of the methods of logical inquiry and reasoning
some skill in applying those methods.
educational programs aimed at developing critical thinking in children and adult learners individually or in group problem solving and decision making contexts continue to address these same three central elements.

the critical thinking project at human science lab london is involved in the scientific study of all major educational systems in prevalence today to assess how the systems are working to promote or impede critical thinking.

contemporary cognitive psychology regards human reasoning as a complex process that is both reactive and reflective. this presents a problem which is detailed as a division of a critical mind in juxtaposition to sensory data and memory.

the psychological theory disposes of the absolute nature of the rational mind in reference to conditions abstract problems and discursive limitations. where the relationship between critical thinking skills and critical thinking dispositions is an empirical question the ability to attain causal domination exists for which socrates was known to be largely disposed against as the practice of sophistry. accounting for a measure of critical thinking dispositions is the california measure of mental motivation and the california critical thinking dispositions inventory. the critical thinking toolkit is an alternative measure that examines student beliefs and attitudes about critical thinking

john dewey is one of many educational leaders who recognized that a curriculum aimed at building thinking skills would benefit the individual learner the community and the entire democracy.

critical thinking is significant in the learning process of internalization in the construction of basic ideas principles and theories inherent in content. and critical thinking is significant in the learning process of application whereby those ideas principles and theories are implemented effectively as they become relevant in learners lives.

each discipline adapts its use of critical thinking concepts and principles. the core concepts are always there but they are embedded in subject-specific content. for students to learn content intellectual engagement is crucial. all students must do their own thinking their own construction of knowledge. good teachers recognize this and therefore focus on the questions readings activities that stimulate the mind to take ownership of key concepts and principles underlying the subject.

historically the teaching of critical thinking focused only on logical procedures such as formal and informal logic. this emphasized to students that good thinking is equivalent to logical thinking. however a second wave of critical thinking urges educators to value conventional techniques meanwhile expanding what it means to be a critical thinker. in  kerry walters compiled a conglomeration of sources surpassing this logical restriction to include many different authors research regarding connected knowing empathy gender-sensitive ideals collaboration world views intellectual autonomy morality and enlightenment. these concepts invite students to incorporate their own perspectives and experiences into their thinking.

in the english and welsh school systems critical thinking is offered as a subject that - to -year-olds can take as an a-level. under the ocr exam board students can sit two exam papers for the as credibility of evidence and assessing and developing argument. the full advanced gce is now available in addition to the two as units candidates sit the two papers resolution of dilemmas and critical reasoning. the a-level tests candidates on their ability to think critically about and analyze arguments on their deductive or inductive validity as well as producing their own arguments. it also tests their ability to analyze certain related topics such as credibility and ethical decision-making. however due to its comparative lack of subject content many universities do not accept it as a main a-level for admissions. nevertheless the as is often useful in developing reasoning skills and the full advanced gce is useful for degree courses in politics philosophy history or theology providing the skills required for critical analysis that are useful for example in biblical study.

there used to also be an advanced extension award offered in critical thinking in the uk open to any a-level student regardless of whether they have the critical thinking a-level. cambridge international examinations have an a-level in thinking skills.

from  assessment and qualifications alliance has also been offering an a-level critical thinking specification. ocr exam board have also modified theirs for . many examinations for university entrance set by universities on top of a-level examinations also include a critical thinking component such as the lnat the ukcat the biomedical admissions test and the thinking skills assessment.

in qatar critical thinking was offered by al-bairaqan outreach non-traditional educational program that targets high school students and focuses on a curriculum based on stem fields. the idea behind al-bairaq is to offer high school students the opportunity to connect with the research environment in the center for advanced materials cam at qatar university. faculty members train and mentor the students and help develop and enhance their critical thinking problem-solving and teamwork skills.failed verification

in  a meta-analysis of the literature on teaching effectiveness in higher education was undertaken. the study noted concerns from higher education politicians and business that higher education was failing to meet societys requirements for well-educated citizens. it concluded that although faculty may aspire to develop students thinking skills in practice they have tended to aim at facts and concepts utilizing lowest levels of cognition rather than developing intellect or values.

in a more recent meta-analysis researchers reviewed  quasi- or true-experimental studies all of which used some form of standardized critical thinking measure to assess the outcome variable. the authors describe the various methodological approaches and attempt to categorize the differing assessment tools which include standardized tests and second-source measures tests developed by teachers tests developed by researchers and tests developed by teachers who also serve the role as the researcher. the results emphasized the need for exposing students to real-world problems and the importance of encouraging open dialogue within a supportive environment. effective strategies for teaching critical thinking are thought to be possible in a wide variety of educational settings. one attempt to assess the humanities role in teaching critical thinking and reducing belief in pseudoscientific claims was made at north carolina state university. some success was noted and the researchers emphasized the value of the humanities in providing the skills to evaluate current events and qualitative data in context.

scott lilienfeld notes that there is some evidence to suggest that basic critical thinking skills might be successfully taught to children at a younger age than previously thought.

critical thinking is an important element of all professional fields and academic disciplines by referencing their respective sets of permissible questions evidence sources criteria etc.. within the framework of scientific skepticism the process of critical thinking involves the careful acquisition and interpretation of information and use of it to reach a well-justified conclusion. the concepts and principles of critical thinking can be applied to any context or case but only by reflecting upon the nature of that application. critical thinking forms therefore a system of related and overlapping modes of thought such as anthropological thinking sociological thinking historical thinking political thinking psychological thinking philosophical thinking mathematical thinking chemical thinking biological thinking ecological thinking legal thinking ethical thinking musical thinking thinking like a painter sculptor engineer business person etc. in other words though critical thinking principles are universal their application to disciplines requires a process of reflective contextualization. psychology offerings for example have included courses such as critical thinking about the paranormal in which students are subjected to a series of cold readings and tested on their belief of the psychic who is eventually announced to be a fake.

critical thinking is considered important in the academic fields for enabling one to analyze evaluate explain and restructure thinking thereby ensuring the act of thinking without false belief. however even with knowledge of the methods of logical inquiry and reasoning mistakes occur and due to a thinkers inability to apply the methodology consistently and because of overruling character traits such as egocentrism. critical thinking includes identification of prejudice bias propaganda self-deception distortion misinformation etc. given research in cognitive psychology some educators believe that schools should focus on teaching their students critical thinking skills and cultivation of intellectual traits.

critical thinking skills can be used to help nurses during the assessment process. through the use of critical thinking nurses can question evaluate and reconstruct the nursing care process by challenging the established theory and practice. critical thinking skills can help nurses problem solve reflect and make a conclusive decision about the current situation they face. critical thinking creates new possibilities for the development of the nursing knowledge. due to the sociocultural environmental and political issues that are affecting healthcare delivery it would be helpful to embody new techniques in nursing. nurses can also engage their critical thinking skills through the socratic method of dialogue and reflection. this practice standard is even part of some regulatory organizations such as the college of nurses of ontarios professional standards for continuing competencies . it requires nurses to engage in reflective practice and keep records of this continued professional development for possible review by the college.

critical thinking is also considered important for human rights education for toleration. the declaration of principles on tolerance adopted by unesco in  affirms that education for tolerance could aim at countering factors that lead to fear and exclusion of others and could help young people to develop capacities for independent judgement critical thinking and ethical reasoning.

the advent and rising popularity of online courses have prompted some to ask if computer-mediated communication cmc promotes hinders or has no effect on the amount and quality of critical thinking in a course relative to face-to-face communication. there is some evidence to suggest a fourth more nuanced possibility that cmc may promote some aspects of critical thinking but hinder others. for example guiller et al.  found that relative to face-to-face discourse online discourse featured more justifications while face-to-face discourse featured more instances of students expanding on what others had said. the increase in justifications may be due to the asynchronous nature of online discussions while the increase in expanding comments may be due to the spontaneity of real-time discussion. newman et al.  showed similar differential effects. they found that while cmc boasted more important statements and linking of ideas it lacked novelty. the authors suggest that this may be due to difficulties participating in a brainstorming-style activity in an asynchronous environment. rather the asynchrony may promote users to put forth considered thought out contributions.

researchers assessing critical thinking in online discussion forums often employ a technique called content analysis where the text of online discourse or the transcription of face-to-face discourse is systematically coded for different kinds of statements relating to critical thinking. for example a statement might be coded as discuss ambiguities to clear them up or welcoming outside knowledge as positive indicators of critical thinking. conversely statements reflecting poor critical thinking may be labeled as sticking to prejudice or assumptions or squashing attempts to bring in outside knowledge. the frequency of these codes in cmc and face-to-face discourse can be compared to draw conclusions about the quality of critical thinking.

searching for evidence of critical thinking in discourse has roots in a definition of critical thinking put forth by kuhn  which emphasizes the social nature of discussion and knowledge construction. there is limited research on the role of social experience in critical thinking development but there is some evidence to suggest it is an important factor. for example research has shown that - to -year-old children can discern to some extent the differential creditability and expertise of individuals. further evidence for the impact of social experience on the development of critical thinking skills comes from work that found that - to -year-olds from china have similar levels of skepticism to - and -year-olds in the united states. if the development of critical thinking skills was solely due to maturation it is unlikely we would see such dramatic differences across cultures.

abstraction in its main sense is a conceptual process where general rules and concepts are derived from the usage and classification of specific examples literal real or concrete signifiers first principles or other methods.

an abstraction is the outcome of this processa concept that acts as a common noun for all subordinate concepts and connects any related concepts as a group field or category.

conceptual abstractions may be formed by filtering the information content of a concept or an observable phenomenon selecting only the aspects which are relevant for a particular subjectively valued purpose. for example abstracting a leather soccer ball to the more general idea of a ball selects only the information on general ball attributes and behavior excluding but not eliminating the other phenomenal and cognitive characteristics of that particular ball. in a typetoken distinction a type e.g. a ball is more abstract than its tokens e.g. that leather soccer ball.

abstraction in its secondary use is a material process discussed in the themes below.

thinking in abstractions is considered by anthropologists archaeologists and sociologists to be one of the key traits in modern human behaviour which is believed to have developed between  and  years ago. its development is likely to have been closely connected with the development of human language which whether spoken or written appears to both involve and facilitate abstract thinking.

abstraction involves induction of ideas or the synthesis of particular facts into one general theory about something. it is the opposite of specification which is the analysis or breaking-down of a general idea or abstraction into concrete facts. abstraction can be illustrated with francis bacons novum organum  a book of modern scientific philosophy written in the late jacobean era of england to encourage modern thinkers to collect specific facts before making any generalizations.

bacon used and promoted induction as an abstraction tool and it countered the ancient deductive-thinking approach that had dominated the intellectual world since the times of greek philosophers like thales anaximander and aristotle. thales c.  bce believed that everything in the universe comes from one main substance water. he deduced or specified from a general idea everything is water to the specific forms of water such as ice snow fog and rivers.

modern scientists can also use the opposite approach of abstraction or going from particular facts collected into one general idea such as the motion of the planets newton . when determining that the sun is the center of our solar system copernicus  scientists had to utilize thousands of measurements to finally conclude that mars moves in an elliptical orbit about the sun kepler  or to assemble multiple specific facts into the law of falling bodies galileo .

an abstraction can be seen as a compression process mapping multiple different pieces of constituent data to a single piece of abstract data; based on similarities in the constituent data for example many different physical cats map to the abstraction cat. this conceptual scheme emphasizes the inherent equality of both constituent and abstract data thus avoiding problems arising from the distinction between abstract and concrete. in this sense the process of abstraction entails the identification of similarities between objects and the process of associating these objects with an abstraction which is itself an object.

for example picture  below illustrates the concrete relationship cat sits on mat.
chains of abstractions can be construed moving from neural impulses arising from sensory perception to basic abstractions such as color or shape to experiential abstractions such as a specific cat to semantic abstractions such as the idea of a cat to classes of objects such as mammals and even categories such as object as opposed to action.

for example graph  below expresses the abstraction agent sits on location. this conceptual scheme entails no specific hierarchical taxonomy such as the one mentioned involving cats and mammals only a progressive exclusion of detail.
instantiation
non-existent things in any particular place and time are often seen as abstract. by contrast instances or members of such an abstract thing might exist in many different places and times.

those abstract things are then said to be multiply instantiated in the sense of picture  picture  etc. shown below. it is not sufficient however to define abstract ideas as those that can be instantiated and to define abstraction as the movement in the opposite direction to instantiation. doing so would make the concepts cat and telephone abstract ideas since despite their varying appearances a particular cat or a particular telephone is an instance of the concept cat or the concept telephone. although the concepts cat and telephone are abstractions they are not abstract in the sense of the objects in graph  below. we might look at other graphs in a progression from cat to mammal to animal and see that animal is more abstract than mammal; but on the other hand mammal is a harder idea to express certainly in relation to marsupial or monotreme.

perhaps confusingly some philosophies refer to tropes instances of properties as abstract particularse.g. the particular redness of a particular apple is an abstract particular. this is similar to qualia and sumbebekos.

still retaining the primary meaning of abstrere or to draw away from the abstraction of money for example works by drawing away from the particular value of things allowing completely incommensurate objects to be compared see the section on physicality below. karl marxs writing on the commodity abstraction recognizes a parallel process.

the state polity as both concept and material practice exemplifies the two sides of this process of abstraction. conceptually the current concept of the state is an abstraction from the much more concrete early-modern use as the standing or status of the prince his visible estates. at the same time materially the practice of statehood is now constitutively and materially more abstract than at the time when princes ruled as the embodiment of extended power.

the way that physical objects like rocks and trees have being differs from the way that properties of abstract concepts or relations have being for example the way the concrete particular individuals pictured in picture  exist differs from the way the concepts illustrated in graph  exist. that difference accounts for the ontological usefulness of the word abstract. the word applies to properties and relations to mark the fact that if they exist they do not exist in space or time but that instances of them can exist potentially in many different places and times.

further information history of accounting  ancient history
a physical object a possible referent of a concept or word is considered concrete not abstract if it is a particular individual that occupies a particular place and time. however in the secondary sense of the term abstraction this physical object can carry materially abstracting processes. for example record-keeping aids throughout the fertile crescent included calculi clay spheres cones etc. which represented counts of items probably livestock or grains sealed in containers. according to schmandt-besserat &  these clay containers contained tokens the total of which were the count of objects being transferred. the containers thus served as something of a bill of lading or an accounts book. in order to avoid breaking open the containers for the count marks were placed on the outside of the containers. these physical marks in other words acted as material abstractions of a materially abstract process of accounting using conceptual abstractions numbers to communicate its meaning.

abstract things are sometimes defined as those things that do not exist in reality or exist only as sensory experiences like the color red. that definition however suffers from the difficulty of deciding which things are real i.e. which things exist in reality. for example it is difficult to agree to whether concepts like god the number three and goodness are real abstract or both.

an approach to resolving such difficulty is to use predicates as a general term for whether things are variously real abstract concrete or of a particular property e.g. good. questions about the properties of things are then propositions about predicates which propositions remain to be evaluated by the investigator. in the graph  below the graphical relationships like the arrows joining boxes and ellipses might denote predicates.

abstractions sometimes have ambiguous referents; for example happiness when used as an abstraction can refer to as many things as there are people and events or states of being which make them happy. likewise architecture refers not only to the design of safe functional buildings but also to elements of creation and innovation which aim at elegant solutions to construction problems to the use of space and to the attempt to evoke an emotional response in the builders owners viewers and users of the building.

abstraction uses a strategy of simplification wherein formerly concrete details are left ambiguous vague or undefined; thus effective communication about things in the abstract requires an intuitive or common experience between the communicator and the communication recipient. this is true for all verbal/abstract communication.

for example many different things can be red. likewise many things sit on surfaces as in picture  to the right. the property of redness and the relation sitting-on are therefore abstractions of those objects. specifically the conceptual diagram graph  identifies only three boxes two ellipses and four arrows and their five labels whereas the picture  shows much more pictorial detail with the scores of implied relationships as implicit in the picture rather than with the nine explicit details in the graph.

graph  details some explicit relationships between the objects of the diagram. for example the arrow between the agent and catelsie depicts an example of an is-a relationship as does the arrow between the location and the mat. the arrows between the gerund/present participle sitting and the nouns agent and location express the diagrams basic relationship; agent is sitting on location; elsie is an instance of cat.

although the description sitting-on graph  is more abstract than the graphic image of a cat sitting on a mat picture  the delineation of abstract things from concrete things is somewhat ambiguous; this ambiguity or vagueness is characteristic of abstraction. thus something as simple as a newspaper might be specified to six levels as in douglas hofstadters illustration of that ambiguity with a progression from abstract to concrete in gdel escher bach 

an abstraction can thus encapsulate each of these levels of detail with no loss of generality. but perhaps a detective or philosopher/scientist/engineer might seek to learn about something at progressively deeper levels of detail to solve a crime or a puzzle.

in philosophical terminology abstraction is the thought process wherein ideas are distanced from objects.

typically abstraction is used in the arts as a synonym for abstract art in general. strictly speaking it refers to art unconcerned with the literal depiction of things from the visible worldit can however refer to an object or image which has been distilled from the real world or indeed another work of art. artwork that reshapes the natural world for expressive purposes is called abstract; that which derives from but does not imitate a recognizable subject is called nonobjective abstraction. in the th century the trend toward abstraction coincided with advances in science technology and changes in urban life eventually reflecting an interest in psychoanalytic theory. later still abstraction was manifest in more purely formal terms such as color freedom from objective context and a reduction of form to basic geometric designs.

computer scientists use abstraction to make models that can be used and re-used without having to re-write all the program code for each new application on every different type of computer. they communicate their solutions with the computer by writing source code in some particular computer language which can be translated into machine code for different types of computers to execute. abstraction allows program designers to separate a framework categorical concepts related to computing problems from specific instances which implement details. this means that the program code can be written so that code doesnt have to depend on the specific details of supporting applications operating system software or hardware but on a categorical concept of the solution. a solution to the problem can then be integrated into the system framework with minimal additional work. this allows programmers to take advantage of another programmers work while requiring only an abstract understanding of the implementation of anothers work apart from the problem that it solves.

abstractions and levels of abstraction play an important role in the theory of general semantics originated by alfred korzybski. anatol rapoport wrote abstracting is a mechanism by which an infinite variety of experiences can be mapped on short noises words.

francis fukuyama defines history as a deliberate attempt of abstraction in which we separate out important from unimportant events.

researchers in linguistics frequently apply abstraction so as to allow analysis of the phenomena of language at the desired level of detail. a commonly used abstraction the phoneme abstracts speech sounds in such a way as to neglect details that cannot serve to differentiate meaning. other analogous kinds of abstractions sometimes called emic units considered by linguists include morphemes graphemes and lexemes.

abstraction also arises in the relation between syntax semantics and pragmatics. pragmatics involves considerations that make reference to the user of the language; semantics considers expressions and what they denote the designata abstracted from the language user; and syntax considers only the expressions themselves abstracted from the designata.

abstraction in mathematics is the process of extracting the underlying structures patterns or properties of a mathematical concept or object removing any dependence on real world objects with which it might originally have been connected and generalizing it so that it has wider applications or matching among other abstract descriptions of equivalent phenomena.

the advantages of abstraction in mathematics are

it reveals deep connections between different areas of mathematics.
known results in one area can suggest conjectures in another related area.
techniques and methods from one area can be applied to prove results in other related area.
patterns from one mathematical object can be generalized to other similar objects in the same class.
the main disadvantage of abstraction is that highly abstract concepts are more difficult to learn and might require a degree of mathematical maturity and experience before they can be assimilated.

in music the term abstraction can be used to describe improvisatory approaches to interpretation and may sometimes indicate abandonment of tonality. atonal music has no key signature and is characterized by the exploration of internal numeric relationships.

further information intelligence mental rotation and mental operations
a recent meta-analysis suggests that the verbal system has greater engagement for abstract concepts when the perceptual system is more engaged for processing of concrete concepts. this is because abstract concepts elicit greater brain activity in the inferior frontal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus compared to concrete concepts which elicit greater activity in the posterior cingulate precuneus fusiform gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus. other research into the human brain suggests that the left and right hemispheres differ in their handling of abstraction. for example one meta-analysis reviewing human brain lesions has shown a left hemisphere bias during tool usage.

abstraction in philosophy is the process or to some the alleged process in concept formation of recognizing some set of common features in individuals and on that basis forming a concept of that feature. the notion of abstraction is important to understanding some philosophical controversies surrounding empiricism and the problem of universals. it has also recently become popular in formal logic under predicate abstraction. another philosophical tool for discussion of abstraction is thought space.

john locke defined abstraction in an essay concerning human understanding

so words are used to stand as outward marks of our internal ideas which are taken from particular things; but if every particular idea that we take in had its own special name there would be no end to names. to prevent this the mind makes particular ideas received from particular things become general; which it does by considering them as they are in the mindmental appearancesseparate from all other existences and from the circumstances of real existence such as time place and so on. this procedure is called abstraction. in it an idea taken from a particular thing becomes a general representative of all of the same kind and its name becomes a general name that is applicable to any existing thing that fits that abstract idea. ..

carl jungs definition of abstraction broadened its scope beyond the thinking process to include exactly four mutually exclusive different complementary psychological functions sensation intuition feeling and thinking. together they form a structural totality of the differentiating abstraction process. abstraction operates in one of these functions when it excludes the simultaneous influence of the other functions and other irrelevancies such as emotion. abstraction requires selective use of this structural split of abilities in the psyche. the opposite of abstraction is concretism. abstraction is one of jungs  definitions in chapter xi of psychological types.

there is an abstract thinking just as there is abstract feeling sensation and intuition. abstract thinking singles out the rational logical qualities ... abstract feeling does the same with ... its feeling-values. ... i put abstract feelings on the same level as abstract thoughts. ... abstract sensation would be aesthetic as opposed to sensuous sensation and abstract intuition would be symbolic as opposed to fantastic intuition. jung   par. .

in social theory abstraction is used as both an ideational and material process. alfred sohn-rethel asked can there be abstraction other than by thought he used the example of commodity abstraction to show that abstraction occurs in practice as people create systems of abstract exchange that extend beyond the immediate physicality of the object and yet have real and immediate consequences. this work was extended through the constitutive abstraction approach of writers associated with the journal arena. two books that have taken this theme of the abstraction of social relations as an organizing process in human history are nation formation towards a theory of abstract community. and the second volume of towards a theory of abstract community published in  globalism nationalism tribalism bringing theory back in  volume  of towards a theory of abstract community. these books argue that the nation is an abstract community bringing together strangers who will never meet as such; thus constituting materially real and substantial but abstracted and mediated relations. the books suggest that contemporary processes of globalization and mediatization have contributed to materially abstracting relations between people with major consequences for how we live our lives.

it can be easily argued that abstraction is an elementary methodological tool in several disciplines of social science. these disciplines have definite and different man concepts that highlight those aspects of man and his behaviour by idealization that are relevant for the given human science. for example homo sociologicus is the man as sociology abstracts and idealizes it depicting man as a social being. moreover we could talk about homo cyber sapiens the man who can extend his biologically determined intelligence thanks to new technologies or homo creativus who is simply creative.

abstraction combined with weberian idealization plays a crucial role in economics. breaking away from directly experienced reality was a common trend in th century sciences especially physics and this was the effort which was fundamentally determined the way economics tried and still tries to approach the economic aspects of social life. it is abstraction we meet in the case of both newtons physics and the neoclassical theory since the goal was to grasp the unchangeable and timeless essence of phenomena. for example newton created the concept of the material point by following the abstraction method so that he abstracted from the dimension and shape of any perceptible object preserving only inertial and translational motion. material point is the ultimate and common feature of all bodies. neoclassical economists created the indefinitely abstract notion of homo economicus by following the same procedure. economists abstract from all individual and personal qualities in order to get to those characteristics that embody the essence of economic activity. eventually it is the substance of the economic man that they try to grasp. any characteristic beyond it only disturbs the functioning of this essential core.

a picture of a lightbulb is associated to someone having an idea a sign of creativity.
creativity is a phenomenon whereby something new and somehow valuable is formed. the created item may be intangible such as an idea a scientific theory a musical composition or a joke or a physical object such as an invention a printed literary work or a painting.

scholarly interest in creativity is found in a number of disciplines primarily psychology business studies and cognitive science but also education technology engineering philosophy particularly philosophy of science theology sociology linguistics economics and mathematics covering the relations between creativity and general intelligence personality type mental and neural processes mental health or artificial intelligence; the potential for fostering creativity through education and training; the fostering of creativity for national economic benefit and the application of creative resources to improve the effectiveness of teaching and learning.

the english word creativity comes from the latin term creare to create make its derivational suffixes also come from latin. the word create appeared in english as early as the th century notably in chaucer to indicate divine creation in the parsons tale

however its modern meaning as an act of human creation did not emerge until after the enlightenment.

in a summary of scientific research into creativity michael mumford suggested over the course of the last decade however we seem to have reached a general agreement that creativity involves the production of novel useful products mumford  p.  or in robert sternbergs words the production of something original and worthwhile. authors have diverged dramatically in their precise definitions beyond these general commonalities peter meusburger reckons that over a hundred different analyses can be found in the literature. as an illustration one definition given by dr. e. paul torrance described it as a process of becoming sensitive to problems deficiencies gaps in knowledge missing elements disharmonies and so on; identifying the difficulty; searching for solutions making guesses or formulating hypotheses about the deficiencies testing and retesting these hypotheses and possibly modifying and retesting them; and finally communicating the results.

creativity in general is usually distinguished from innovation in particular where the stress is on implementation. for example teresa amabile and pratt  defines creativity as production of novel and useful ideas and innovation as implementation of creative ideas while the oecd and eurostat state that innovation is more than a new idea or an invention. an innovation requires implementation either by being put into active use or by being made available for use by other parties firms individuals or organisations.

there is also an emotional creativity ec which is described as a pattern of cognitive abilities and personality traits related to originality and appropriateness in emotional experience. research has shown emotional creativity is interrelated with the real-life involvement in different types of specific creative leisure activities.

theories of creativity particularly investigation of why some people are more creative than others have focused on a variety of aspects. the dominant factors are usually identified as the four ps  process product person and place according to mel rhodes. a focus on process is shown in cognitive approaches that try to describe thought mechanisms and techniques for creative thinking. theories invoking divergent rather than convergent thinking such as guilford or those describing the staging of the creative process such as wallas are primarily theories of creative process. a focus on creative product usually appears in attempts to measure creativity psychometrics see below and in creative ideas framed as successful memes. the psychometric approach to creativity reveals that it also involves the ability to produce more. a focus on the nature of the creative person considers more general intellectual habits such as openness levels of ideation autonomy expertise exploratory behavior and so on. a focus on place considers the circumstances in which creativity flourishes such as degrees of autonomy access to resources and the nature of gatekeepers. creative lifestyles are characterized by nonconforming attitudes and behaviors as well as flexibility.

greek philosophers like plato rejected the concept of creativity preferring to see art as a form of discovery. asked in the republic will we say of a painter that he makes something plato answers certainly not he merely imitates.
most ancient cultures including thinkers of ancient greece ancient china and ancient india lacked the concept of creativity seeing art as a form of discovery and not creation. the ancient greeks had no terms corresponding to to create or creator except for the expression poiein to make which only applied to poiesis poetry and to the poietes poet or maker who made it. plato did not believe in art as a form of creation. asked in the republic will we say of a painter that he makes something he answers certainly not he merely imitates.

it is commonly argued that the notion of creativity originated in western culture through christianity as a matter of divine inspiration. according to the historian daniel j. boorstin the early western conception of creativity was the biblical story of creation given in the genesis. however this is not creativity in the modern sense which did not arise until the renaissance. in the judaeo-christian tradition creativity was the sole province of god; humans were not considered to have the ability to create something new except as an expression of gods work. a concept similar to that of christianity existed in greek culture for instance muses were seen as mediating inspiration from the gods. romans and greeks invoked the concept of an external creative daemon greek or genius latin linked to the sacred or the divine. however none of these views are similar to the modern concept of creativity and the individual was not seen as the cause of creation until the renaissance. it was during the renaissance that creativity was first seen not as a conduit for the divine but from the abilities of great men.

the rejection of creativity in favor of discovery and the belief that individual creation was a conduit of the divine would dominate the west probably until the renaissance and even later. the development of the modern concept of creativity begins in the renaissance when creation began to be perceived as having originated from the abilities of the individual and not god. this could be attributed to the leading intellectual movement of the time aptly named humanism which developed an intensely human-centric outlook on the world valuing the intellect and achievement of the individual. from this philosophy arose the renaissance man or polymath an individual who embodies the principals of humanism in their ceaseless courtship with knowledge and creation. one of the most well-known and immensely accomplished examples is leonardo da vinci.

however this shift was gradual and would not become immediately apparent until the enlightenment. by the th century and the age of enlightenment mention of creativity notably in aesthetics linked with the concept of imagination became more frequent. in the writing of thomas hobbes imagination became a key element of human cognition; william duff was one of the first to identify imagination as a quality of genius typifying the separation being made between talent productive but breaking no new ground and genius.

as a direct and independent topic of study creativity effectively received no attention until the th century. runco and albert argue that creativity as the subject of proper study began seriously to emerge in the late th century with the increased interest in individual differences inspired by the arrival of darwinism. in particular they refer to the work of francis galton who through his eugenicist outlook took a keen interest in the heritability of intelligence with creativity taken as an aspect of genius.

in the late th and early th centuries leading mathematicians and scientists such as hermann von helmholtz  and henri poincar  began to reflect on and publicly discuss their creative processes.

the insights of poincar and von helmholtz were built on in early accounts of the creative process by pioneering theorists such as graham wallas and max wertheimer. in his work art of thought published in  wallas presented one of the first models of the creative process. in the wallas stage model creative insights and illuminations may be explained by a process consisting of  stages

i preparation preparatory work on a problem that focuses the individuals mind on the problem and explores the problems dimensions
ii incubation where the problem is internalized into the unconscious mind and nothing appears externally to be happening
iii intimation the creative person gets a feeling that a solution is on its way
iv illumination or insight where the creative idea bursts forth from its preconscious processing into conscious awareness;
v verification where the idea is consciously verified elaborated and then applied.
wallas model is often treated as four stages with intimation seen as a sub-stage.

wallas considered creativity to be a legacy of the evolutionary process which allowed humans to quickly adapt to rapidly changing environments. simonton provides an updated perspective on this view in his book origins of genius darwinian perspectives on creativity.

in  alfred north whitehead gave the gifford lectures at the university of edinburgh later published as process and reality. he is credited with having coined the term creativity to serve as the ultimate category of his metaphysical scheme whitehead actually coined the term  our term still the preferred currency of exchange among literature science and the arts. . . a term that quickly became so popular so omnipresent that its invention within living memory and by alfred north whitehead of all people quickly became occluded.

although psychometric studies of creativity had been conducted by the london school of psychology as early as  with the work of h. l. hargreaves into the faculty of imagination the formal psychometric measurement of creativity from the standpoint of orthodox psychological literature is usually considered to have begun with j. p. guilfords address to the american psychological association in . the address helped to popularize the study of creativity and to focus attention on scientific approaches to conceptualizing creativity. statistical analyses led to the recognition of creativity as measured as a separate aspect of human cognition to iq-type intelligence into which it had previously been subsumed. guilfords work suggested that above a threshold level of iq the relationship between creativity and classically measured intelligence broke down.

james c. kaufman and beghetto introduced a four c model of creativity; mini-c transformative learning involving personally meaningful interpretations of experiences actions and insights little-c everyday problem solving and creative expression pro-c exhibited by people who are professionally or vocationally creative though not necessarily eminent and big-c creativity considered great in the given field. this model was intended to help accommodate models and theories of creativity that stressed competence as an essential component and the historical transformation of a creative domain as the highest mark of creativity. it also the authors argued made a useful framework for analyzing creative processes in individuals.

the contrast of terms big c and little c has been widely used. kozbelt beghetto and runco use a little-c/big-c model to review major theories of creativity. margaret boden distinguishes between h-creativity historical and p-creativity personal.

robinson and anna craft have focused on creativity in a general population particularly with respect to education. craft makes a similar distinction between high and little c creativity. and cites ken robinson as referring to high and democratic creativity. mihaly csikszentmihalyi has defined creativity in terms of those individuals judged to have made significant creative perhaps domain-changing contributions. simonton has analysed the career trajectories of eminent creative people in order to map patterns and predictors of creative productivity.

there has been much empirical study in psychology and cognitive science of the processes through which creativity occurs. interpretation of the results of these studies has led to several possible explanations of the sources and methods of creativity.

incubation is a temporary break from creative problem solving that can result in insight. there has been some empirical research looking at whether as the concept of incubation in wallas model implies a period of interruption or rest from a problem may aid creative problem-solving. ward lists various hypotheses that have been advanced to explain why incubation may aid creative problem-solving and notes how some empirical evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that incubation aids creative problem in that it enables forgetting of misleading clues. absence of incubation may lead the problem solver to become fixated on inappropriate strategies of solving the problem. this work disputes the earlier hypothesis that creative solutions to problems arise mysteriously from the unconscious mind while the conscious mind is occupied on other tasks. this earlier hypothesis is discussed in csikszentmihalyis five phase model of the creative process which describes incubation as a time that your unconscious takes over. this allows for unique connections to be made without our consciousness trying to make logical order out of the problem.

j. p. guilford drew a distinction between convergent and divergent production commonly renamed convergent and divergent thinking. convergent thinking involves aiming for a single correct solution to a problem whereas divergent thinking involves creative generation of multiple answers to a set problem. divergent thinking is sometimes used as a synonym for creativity in psychology literature. other researchers have occasionally used the terms flexible thinking or fluid intelligence which are roughly similar to but not synonymous with creativity.

in  finke et al. proposed the geneplore model in which creativity takes place in two phases a generative phase where an individual constructs mental representations called preinventive structures and an exploratory phase where those structures are used to come up with creative ideas. some evidence shows that when people use their imagination to develop new ideas those ideas are heavily structured in predictable ways by the properties of existing categories and concepts. weisberg argued by contrast that creativity only involves ordinary cognitive processes yielding extraordinary results.

helie and sun more recently proposed a unified framework for understanding creativity in problem solving namely the explicitimplicit interaction eii theory of creativity. this new theory constitutes an attempt at providing a more unified explanation of relevant phenomena in part by reinterpreting/integrating various fragmentary existing theories of incubation and insight.

the eii theory relies mainly on five basic principles namely

the co-existence of and the difference between explicit and implicit knowledge;
the simultaneous involvement of implicit and explicit processes in most tasks;
the redundant representation of explicit and implicit knowledge;
the integration of the results of explicit and implicit processing;
the iterative and possibly bidirectional processing.
a computational implementation of the theory was developed based on the clarion cognitive architecture and used to simulate relevant human data. this work represents an initial step in the development of process-based theories of creativity encompassing incubation insight and various other related phenomena.

in the act of creation arthur koestler introduced the concept of bisociation  that creativity arises as a result of the intersection of two quite different frames of reference. this idea was later developed into conceptual blending. in the s various approaches in cognitive science that dealt with metaphor analogy and structure mapping have been converging and a new integrative approach to the study of creativity in science art and humor has emerged under the label conceptual blending.

honing theory developed principally by psychologist liane gabora posits that creativity arises due to the self-organizing self-mending nature of a worldview. the creative process is a way in which the individual hones and re-hones an integrated worldview. honing theory places emphasis not only on the externally visible creative outcome but also the internal cognitive restructuring and repair of the worldview brought about by the creative process. when faced with a creatively demanding task there is an interaction between the conception of the task and the worldview. the conception of the task changes through interaction with the worldview and the worldview changes through interaction with the task. this interaction is reiterated until the task is complete at which point not only is the task conceived of differently but the worldview is subtly or drastically transformed as it follows the natural tendency of a worldview to attempt to resolve dissonance and seek internal consistency amongst its components whether they be ideas attitudes or bits of knowledge.

a central feature of honing theory is the notion of a potentiality state. honing theory posits that creative thought proceeds not by searching through and randomly mutating predefined possibilities but by drawing upon associations that exist due to overlap in the distributed neural cell assemblies that participate in the encoding of experiences in memory. midway through the creative process one may have made associations between the current task and previous experiences but not yet disambiguated which aspects of those previous experiences are relevant to the current task. thus the creative idea may feel half-baked. it is at that point that it can be said to be in a potentiality state because how it will actualize depends on the different internally or externally generated contexts it interacts with.

honing theory is held to explain certain phenomena not dealt with by other theories of creativity for example how different works by the same creator are observed in studies to exhibit a recognizable style or voice even though in different creative outlets. this is not predicted by theories of creativity that emphasize chance processes or the accumulation of expertise but it is predicted by honing theory according to which personal style reflects the creators uniquely structured worldview. another example is in the environmental stimulus for creativity. creativity is commonly considered to be fostered by a supportive nurturing trustworthy environment conducive to self-actualization. however research shows that creativity is also associated with childhood adversity which would stimulate honing.

in everyday thought people often spontaneously imagine alternatives to reality when they think if only.... their counterfactual thinking is viewed as an example of everyday creative processes. it has been proposed that the creation of counterfactual alternatives to reality depends on similar cognitive processes to rational thought.

holm-hadulla developed with his colleagues a dialectical theory of creativity. it is an interdisciplinary theory. the dialectical theory of creativity starts with the antique concept that creativity takes place in an interplay between order and chaos. similar ideas can be found in neurosciences and psychology. neurobiologically it can be shown that the creative process takes place in a dynamic interplay between coherence and incoherence that leads to new and usable neuronal networks. psychology shows how the dialectics of convergent and focused thinking with divergent and associative thinking leads to new ideas and products. also creative personality traits like the big five seem to be dialectically intertwined in the creative process emotional instability vs. stability extraversion vs. introversion openness vs. reserve agreeableness vs. antagonism and disinhibition vs. constraint. holm-hadulla and colleagues exemplified the dialectics of creative processes and personality traits on behalf of extraordinary personalities like johann w. v. goethe robert schumann jim morrison madonna ciccone and mick jagger. the dialectical theory of creativity applies also to counseling and psychotherapy.

there was a creativity quotient developed similar to the intelligence quotient iq. it makes use of the results of divergent thinking tests see below by processing them further. it gives more weight to ideas that are radically different from other ideas in the response.

j. p. guilfords group which pioneered the modern psychometric study of creativity constructed several tests to measure creativity in 

plot titles where participants are given the plot of a story and asked to write original titles.
quick responses is a word-association test scored for uncommonness.
figure concepts where participants were given simple drawings of objects and individuals and asked to find qualities or features that are common by two or more drawings; these were scored for uncommonness.
unusual uses is finding unusual uses for common everyday objects such as bricks.
remote associations where participants are asked to find a word between two given words e.g. hand _____ call
remote consequences where participants are asked to generate a list of consequences of unexpected events e.g. loss of gravity
originally guilford was trying to create a model for intellect as a whole but in doing so also created a model for creativity. guilford made an important assumption for creative research creativity isnt one abstract concept.  the idea that creativity is a category rather than one single concept opened up the ability for other researchers to look at creativity with a whole new perspective.

additionally guilford hypothesized one of the first models for the components of creativity.  he explained that creativity was a result of having

sensitivity to problems or the ability to recognize problems;
fluency which encompasses
a. ideational fluency or the ability rapidly to produce a variety of ideas that fulfill stated requirements;
b. associational fluency or the ability to generate a list of words each of which is associated with a given word;                    
c. expressional fluency or the ability to organize words into larger units such as phrases sentences and paragraphs;
flexibility which encompasses                      
a. spontaneous flexibility or the ability to demonstrate flexibility;                          
b. adaptive flexibility or the ability to produce responses that are novel and high in quality.
this represents the base model by which several researchers would take and alter to produce their new theories of creativity years later. building on guilfords work torrance developed the torrance tests of creative thinking in . they involved simple tests of divergent thinking and other problem-solving skills which were scored on

fluency  the total number of interpretable meaningful and relevant ideas generated in response to the stimulus.
originality  the statistical rarity of the responses among the test subjects.
elaboration  the amount of detail in the responses.
such tests sometimes called divergent thinking dt tests have been both supported and criticized.

considerable progress has been made in automated scoring of divergent thinking tests using semantic approach. when compared to human raters nlp techniques were shown to be reliable and valid in scoring the originality. the reported computer programs were able to achieve a correlation of . and . respectively to human graders.

semantic networks were also used to devise originality scores that yielded significant correlations with socio-personal measures. most recently an nsf-funded team of researchers led by james c. kaufman and mark a. runco combined expertise in creativity research natural language processing computational linguistics and statistical data analysis to devise a scalable system for computerized automated testing sparcit creativity index testing system. this system enabled automated scoring of dt tests that is reliable objective and scalable thus addressing most of the issues of dt tests that had been found and reported. the resultant computer system was able to achieve a correlation of . to human graders.

some researchers have taken a social-personality approach to the measurement of creativity. in these studies personality traits such as independence of judgement self-confidence attraction to complexity aesthetic orientation and risk-taking are used as measures of the creativity of individuals. a meta-analysis by gregory feist showed that creative people tend to be more open to new experiences less conventional and less conscientious more self-confident self-accepting driven ambitious dominant hostile and impulsive. openness conscientiousness self-acceptance hostility and impulsivity had the strongest effects of the traits listed. within the framework of the big five model of personality some consistent traits have emerged. openness to experience has been shown to be consistently related to a whole host of different assessments of creativity. among the other big five traits research has demonstrated subtle differences between different domains of creativity. compared to non-artists artists tend to have higher levels of openness to experience and lower levels of conscientiousness while scientists are more open to experience conscientious and higher in the confidence-dominance facets of extraversion compared to non-scientists.

an alternative is using biographical methods. these methods use quantitative characteristics such as the number of publications patents or performances of a work. while this method was originally developed for highly creative personalities today it is also available as self-report questionnaires supplemented with frequent less outstanding creative behaviors such as writing a short story or creating your own recipes. for example the creative achievement questionnaire a self-report test that measures creative achievement across  domains was described in  and shown to be reliable and valid when compared to other measures of creativity and to independent evaluation of creative output. besides the english original it was also used in a chinese french and german-speaking version. it is the self-report questionnaire most frequently used in research.

the potential relationship between creativity and intelligence has been of interest since the late s when a multitude of influential studies  from getzels & jackson barron wallach & kogan and guilford  focused not only on creativity but also on intelligence. this joint focus highlights both the theoretical and practical importance of the relationship researchers are interested not only if the constructs are related but also how and why.

there are multiple theories accounting for their relationship with the  main theories as follows

threshold theory  intelligence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for creativity. there is a moderate positive relationship between creativity and intelligence until iq ~.
certification theory  creativity is not intrinsically related to intelligence. instead individuals are required to meet the requisite level intelligence in order to gain a certain level of education/work which then in turn offers the opportunity to be creative. displays of creativity are moderated by intelligence.
interference theory  extremely high intelligence might interfere with creative ability.
sternberg and ohara proposed a framework of  possible relationships between creativity and intelligence

creativity is a subset of intelligence
intelligence is a subset of creativity
creativity and intelligence are overlapping constructs
creativity and intelligence are part of the same construct coincident sets
creativity and intelligence are distinct constructs disjoint sets
creativity as a subset of intelligence
a number of researchers include creativity either explicitly or implicitly as a key component of intelligence.

examples of theories that include creativity as a subset of intelligence

sternbergs theory of successful intelligence see triarchic theory of intelligence includes creativity as a main component and comprises  sub-theories componential analytic contextual practical and experiential creative. experiential sub-theory  the ability to use pre-existing knowledge and skills to solve new and novel problems  is directly related to creativity.
the cattellhorncarroll theory includes creativity as a subset of intelligence. specifically it is associated with the broad group factor of long-term storage and retrieval glr. glr narrow abilities relating to creativity include ideational fluency associational fluency and originality/creativity. silvia et al. conducted a study to look at the relationship between divergent thinking and verbal fluency tests and reported that both fluency and originality in divergent thinking were significantly affected by the broad level glr factor. martindale extended the chc-theory in the sense that it was proposed that those individuals who are creative are also selective in their processing speed martindale argues that in the creative process larger amounts of information are processed more slowly in the early stages and as the individual begins to understand the problem the processing speed is increased.
the dual process theory of intelligence posits a two-factor/type model of intelligence. type  is a conscious process and concerns goal directed thoughts which are explained by g. type  is an unconscious process and concerns spontaneous cognition which encompasses daydreaming and implicit learning ability. kaufman argues that creativity occurs as a result of type  and type  processes working together in combination. the use of each type in the creative process can be used to varying degrees.
intelligence as a subset of creativity
in this relationship model intelligence is a key component in the development of creativity.

sternberg & lubarts investment theory. using the metaphor of a stock market they demonstrate that creative thinkers are like good investors  they buy low and sell high in their ideas. like under/low-valued stock creative individuals generate unique ideas that are initially rejected by other people. the creative individual has to persevere and convince the others of the ideas value. after convincing the others and thus increasing the ideas value the creative individual sells high by leaving the idea with the other people and moves onto generating another idea. according to this theory six distinct but related elements contribute to successful creativity intelligence knowledge thinking styles personality motivation and environment. intelligence is just one of the six factors that can either solely or in conjunction with the other five factors generate creative thoughts.
amabiles componential model of creativity. in this model there are  within-individual components needed for creativity  domain-relevant skills creativity-relevant processes and task motivation  and  component external to the individual their surrounding social environment. creativity requires a confluence of all components. high creativity will result when an individual is intrinsically motivated possesses both a high level of domain-relevant skills and has high skills in creative thinking and is working in a highly creative environment.
amusement park theoretical model. in this -step theory both domain-specific and generalist views are integrated into a model of creativity. the researchers make use of the metaphor of the amusement park to demonstrate that within each of these creative levels intelligence plays a key role
to get into the amusement park there are initial requirements e.g. time/transport to go to the park. initial requirements like intelligence are necessary but not sufficient for creativity. they are more like prerequisites for creativity and if an individual does not possess the basic level of the initial requirement intelligence then they will not be able to generate creative thoughts/behaviour.
secondly are the subcomponents  general thematic areas  that increase in specificity. like choosing which type of amusement park to visit e.g. a zoo or a water park these areas relate to the areas in which someone could be creative e.g. poetry.
thirdly there are specific domains. after choosing the type of park to visit e.g. waterpark you then have to choose which specific park to go to. within the poetry domain there are many different types e.g. free verse riddles sonnet etc. that have to be selected from.
lastly there are micro-domains. these are the specific tasks that reside within each domain e.g. individual lines in a free verse poem / individual rides at the waterpark.
creativity and intelligence as overlapping yet distinct constructs
this possible relationship concerns creativity and intelligence as distinct but intersecting constructs.

renzullis three-ring conception of giftedness. in this conceptualisation giftedness occurs as a result from the overlap of above average intellectual ability creativity and task commitment. under this view creativity and intelligence are distinct constructs but they do overlap under the correct conditions.
pass theory of intelligence. in this theory the planning component  relating to the ability to solve problems make decisions and take action  strongly overlaps with the concept of creativity.
threshold theory tt. a number of previous research findings have suggested that a threshold exists in the relationship between creativity and intelligence  both constructs are moderately positively correlated up to an iq of ~. above this threshold of an iq of  if there is a relationship at all it is small and weak. tt posits that a moderate level of intelligence is necessary for creativity.
in support of the tt barron reported finding a non-significant correlation between creativity and intelligence in a gifted sample; and a significant correlation in a non-gifted sample. yamamoto in a sample of secondary school children reported a significant correlation between creativity and intelligence of r = . and reported no significant correlation when the sample consisted of gifted children. fuchs-beauchamp et al. in a sample of preschoolers found that creativity and intelligence correlated from r = . to r = . in the group of children who had an iq below the threshold; and in the group above the threshold the correlations were r = <.. cho et al. reported a correlation of . between creativity and intelligence in the average iq group of a sample of adolescents and adults; and a correlation of close to r = . for the high iq group. jauk et al. found support for the tt but only for measures of creative potential; not creative performance.

much modern day research reports findings against tt. wai et al. in a study using data from the longitudinal study of mathematically precocious youth  a cohort of elite students from early adolescence into adulthood  found that differences in sat scores at age  were predictive of creative real-life outcomes  years later. kims meta-analysis of  studies did not find any supporting evidence for tt and instead negligible correlations were reported between intelligence creativity and divergent thinking both below and above iqs of . preckel et al. investigating fluid intelligence and creativity reported small correlations of r = . to r = . across all levels of cognitive ability.

under this view researchers posit that there are no differences in the mechanisms underlying creativity in those used in normal problem solving; and in normal problem solving there is no need for creativity. thus creativity and intelligence problem solving are the same thing. perkins referred to this as the nothing-special view.

weisberg & alba examined problem solving by having participants complete the -dot problem see thinking outside the box#nine dots puzzle  where the participants are asked to connect all  dots in the  rows of  dots using  straight lines or less without lifting their pen or tracing the same line twice. the problem can only be solved if the lines go outside the boundaries of the square of dots. results demonstrated that even when participants were given this insight they still found it difficult to solve the problem thus showing that to successfully complete the task it is not just insight or creativity that is required.

in this view creativity and intelligence are completely different unrelated constructs.

getzels and jackson administered  creativity measures to a group of  children from grades - and compared these test findings to results from previously administered by the school iq tests. they found that the correlation between the creativity measures and iq was r = .. the high creativity group scored in the top % of the overall creativity measures but were not included in the top % of iq scorers. the high intelligence group scored the opposite they scored in the top % for iq but were outside the top % scorers for creativity thus showing that creativity and intelligence are distinct and unrelated.

however this work has been heavily criticised. wallach and kogan highlighted that the creativity measures were not only weakly related to one another to the extent that they were no more related to one another than they were with iq but they seemed to also draw upon non-creative skills. mcnemar noted that there were major measurement issues in that the iq scores were a mixture from  different iq tests.

wallach and kogan administered  measures of creativity each of which resulted in a score for originality and fluency; and  measures of general intelligence to  th grade children. these tests were untimed and given in a game-like manner aiming to facilitate creativity. inter-correlations between creativity tests were on average r = .. inter-correlations between intelligence measures were on average r = . with each other. creativity tests and intelligence measures correlated r = ..


distributed functional brain network associated with divergent thinking
the neuroscience of creativity looks at the operation of the brain during creative behaviour. it has been addressed in the article creative innovation possible brain mechanisms. the authors write that creative innovation might require coactivation and communication between regions of the brain that ordinarily are not strongly connected. highly creative people who excel at creative innovation tend to differ from others in three ways

they have a high level of specialized knowledge
they are capable of divergent thinking mediated by the frontal lobe.
and they are able to modulate neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine in their frontal lobe.
thus the frontal lobe appears to be the part of the cortex that is most important for creativity.

this article also explored the links between creativity and sleep mood and addiction disorders and depression.

in  alice flaherty presented a three-factor model of the creative drive. drawing from evidence in brain imaging drug studies and lesion analysis she described the creative drive as resulting from an interaction of the frontal lobes the temporal lobes and dopamine from the limbic system. the frontal lobes can be seen as responsible for idea generation and the temporal lobes for idea editing and evaluation. abnormalities in the frontal lobe such as depression or anxiety generally decrease creativity while abnormalities in the temporal lobe often increase creativity. high activity in the temporal lobe typically inhibits activity in the frontal lobe and vice versa. high dopamine levels increase general arousal and goal directed behaviors and reduce latent inhibition and all three effects increase the drive to generate ideas. a  study on creativity found that it involves the interaction of multiple neural networks including those that support associative thinking along with other default mode network functions.

vandervert described how the brains frontal lobes and the cognitive functions of the cerebellum collaborate to produce creativity and innovation. vanderverts explanation rests on considerable evidence that all processes of working memory responsible for processing all thought are adaptively modeled for increased efficiency by the cerebellum. the cerebellum consisting of  billion neurons which is more than the entirety of the rest of the brain is also widely known to adaptively model all bodily movement for efficiency. the cerebellums adaptive models of working memory processing are then fed back to especially frontal lobe working memory control processes where creative and innovative thoughts arise. apparently creative insight or the aha experience is then triggered in the temporal lobe.

according to vandervert the details of creative adaptation begin in forward cerebellar models which are anticipatory/exploratory controls for movement and thought. these cerebellar processing and control architectures have been termed hierarchical modular selection and identification for control hmosaic. new hierarchically arranged levels of the cerebellar control architecture hmosaic develop as mental mulling in working memory is extended over time. these new levels of the control architecture are fed forward to the frontal lobes. since the cerebellum adaptively models all movement and all levels of thought and emotion vanderverts approach helps explain creativity and innovation in sports art music the design of video games technology mathematics the child prodigy and thought in general.

essentially vandervert has argued that when a person is confronted with a challenging new situation visual-spatial working memory and speech-related working memory are decomposed and re-composed fractionated by the cerebellum and then blended in the cerebral cortex in an attempt to deal with the new situation. with repeated attempts to deal with challenging situations the cerebro-cerebellar blending process continues to optimize the efficiency of how working memory deals with the situation or problem. most recently he has argued that this is the same process only involving visual-spatial working memory and pre-language vocalization that led to the evolution of language in humans. vandervert and vandervert-weathers have pointed out that this blending process because it continuously optimizes efficiencies constantly improves prototyping attempts toward the invention or innovation of new ideas music art or technology. prototyping they argue not only produces new products it trains the cerebro-cerebellar pathways involved to become more efficient at prototyping itself. further vandervert and vandervert-weathers believe that this repetitive mental prototyping or mental rehearsal involving the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex explains the success of the self-driven individualized patterning of repetitions initiated by the teaching methods of the khan academy. the model proposed by vandervert has however received incisive critique from several authors.

creativity involves the forming of associative elements into new combinations that are useful or meet some requirement. sleep aids this process. rem rather than nrem sleep appears to be responsible. this has been suggested to be due to changes in cholinergic and noradrenergic neuromodulation that occurs during rem sleep. during this period of sleep high levels of acetylcholine in the hippocampus suppress feedback from the hippocampus to the neocortex and lower levels of acetylcholine and norepinephrine in the neocortex encourage the spread of associational activity within neocortical areas without control from the hippocampus. this is in contrast to waking consciousness where higher levels of norepinephrine and acetylcholine inhibit recurrent connections in the neocortex. it is proposed that rem sleep adds creativity by allowing neocortical structures to reorganize associative hierarchies in which information from the hippocampus would be reinterpreted in relation to previous semantic representations or nodes.

some theories suggest that creativity may be particularly susceptible to affective influence. as noted in voting behavior the term affect in this context can refer to liking or disliking key aspects of the subject in question. this work largely follows from findings in psychology regarding the ways in which affective states are involved in human judgment and decision-making.

according to alice isen positive affect has three primary effects on cognitive activity

positive affect makes additional cognitive material available for processing increasing the number of cognitive elements available for association;
positive affect leads to defocused attention and a more complex cognitive context increasing the breadth of those elements that are treated as relevant to the problem;
positive affect increases cognitive flexibility increasing the probability that diverse cognitive elements will in fact become associated. together these processes lead positive affect to have a positive influence on creativity.
barbara fredrickson in her broaden-and-build model suggests that positive emotions such as joy and love broaden a persons available repertoire of cognitions and actions thus enhancing creativity.

according to these researchers positive emotions increase the number of cognitive elements available for association attention scope and the number of elements that are relevant to the problem cognitive scope.

various meta-analyses such as baas et al.  of  studies about creativity and affect support the link between creativity and positive affect. research has shown that practicing creative leisure activities is interrelated with the emotional creativity.

jrgen schmidhubers formal theory of creativity postulates that creativity curiosity and interestingness are by-products of a simple computational principle for measuring and optimizing learning progress. consider an agent able to manipulate its environment and thus its own sensory inputs. the agent can use a black box optimization method such as reinforcement learning to learn through informed trial and error sequences of actions that maximize the expected sum of its future reward signals. there are extrinsic reward signals for achieving externally given goals such as finding food when hungry. but schmidhubers objective function to be maximized also includes an additional intrinsic term to model wow-effects. this non-standard term motivates purely creative behavior of the agent even when there are no external goals. a wow-effect is formally defined as follows. as the agent is creating and predicting and encoding the continually growing history of actions and sensory inputs it keeps improving the predictor or encoder which can be implemented as an artificial neural network or some other machine learning device that can exploit regularities in the data to improve its performance over time. the improvements can be measured precisely by computing the difference in computational costs storage size number of required synapses errors time needed to encode new observations before and after learning. this difference depends on the encoders present subjective knowledge which changes over time but the theory formally takes this into account. the cost difference measures the strength of the present wow-effect due to sudden improvements in data compression or computational speed. it becomes an intrinsic reward signal for the action selector. the objective function thus motivates the action optimizer to create action sequences causing more wow-effects. irregular random data or noise do not permit any wow-effects or learning progress and thus are boring by nature providing no reward. already known and predictable regularities also are boring. temporarily interesting are only the initially unknown novel regular patterns in both actions and observations. this motivates the agent to perform continual open-ended active creative exploration. schmidhubers work is highly influential in intrinsic motivation which has emerged as a research topic in its own right as part of the study of artificial intelligence and robotics.

according to schmidhuber his objective function explains the activities of scientists artists and comedians. for example physicists are motivated to create experiments leading to observations obeying previously unpublished physical laws permitting better data compression. likewise composers receive intrinsic reward for creating non-arbitrary melodies with unexpected but regular harmonies that permit wow-effects through data compression improvements. similarly a comedian gets intrinsic reward for inventing a novel joke with an unexpected punch line related to the beginning of the story in an initially unexpected but quickly learnable way that also allows for better compression of the perceived data. schmidhuber argues that ongoing computer hardware advances will greatly scale up rudimentary artificial scientists and artistsclarification needed based on simple implementations of the basic principle since . he used the theory to create low-complexity art and an attractive human face.

a study by psychologist j. philippe rushton found creativity to correlate with intelligence and psychoticism. another study found creativity to be greater in schizotypal than in either normal or schizophrenic individuals. while divergent thinking was associated with bilateral activation of the prefrontal cortex schizotypal individuals were found to have much greater activation of their right prefrontal cortex. this study hypothesizes that such individuals are better at accessing both hemispheres allowing them to make novel associations at a faster rate. in agreement with this hypothesis ambidexterity is also associated with schizotypal and schizophrenic individuals. three recent studies by mark batey and adrian furnham have demonstrated the relationships between schizotypal and hypomanic personality and several different measures of creativity.

particularly strong links have been identified between creativity and mood disorders particularly manic-depressive disorder a.k.a. bipolar disorder and depressive disorder a.k.a. unipolar disorder. in touched with fire manic-depressive illness and the artistic temperament kay redfield jamison summarizes studies of mood-disorder rates in writers poets and artists. she also explores research that identifies mood disorders in such famous writers and artists as ernest hemingway who shot himself after electroconvulsive treatment virginia woolf who drowned herself when she felt a depressive episode coming on composer robert schumann who died in a mental institution and even the famed visual artist michelangelo.

a study looking at  persons with schizophrenia bipolar disorder or unipolar depression and their relatives found overrepresentation in creative professions for those with bipolar disorder as well as for undiagnosed siblings of those with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. there was no overall overrepresentation but overrepresentation for artistic occupations among those diagnosed with schizophrenia. there was no association for those with unipolar depression or their relatives.

another study involving more than one million people conducted by swedish researchers at the karolinska institute reported a number of correlations between creative occupations and mental illnesses. writers had a higher risk of anxiety and bipolar disorders schizophrenia unipolar depression and substance abuse and were almost twice as likely as the general population to kill themselves. dancers and photographers were also more likely to have bipolar disorder.

as a group those in the creative professions were no more likely to have psychiatric disorders than other people although they were more likely to have a close relative with a disorder including anorexia and to some extent autism the journal of psychiatric research reports.

according to psychologist robert epstein phd creativity can be obstructed through stress.

conversely research has shown that creative activities such as art therapy poetry writing journaling and reminiscence can promote mental well-being.

creativity can be expressed in a number of different forms depending on unique people and environments. a number of different theorists have suggested models of the creative person. one model suggests that there are four creativity profiles that can help produce growth innovation speed etc.

i incubate long-term development
ii imagine breakthrough ideas
iii improve incremental adjustments
iv invest short-term goals
research by dr mark batey of the psychometrics at work research group at manchester business school has suggested that the creative profile can be explained by four primary creativity traits with narrow facets within each

i idea generation fluency originality incubation and illumination
ii personality curiosity and tolerance for ambiguity
iii motivation intrinsic extrinsic and achievement
iv confidence producing sharing and implementing
this model was developed in a sample of  working adults using the statistical techniques of exploratory factor analysis followed by confirmatory factor analysis by structural equation modelling.

an important aspect of the creativity profiling approach is to account for the tension between predicting the creative profile of an individual as characterised by the psychometric approach and the evidence that team creativity is founded on diversity and difference.

one characteristic of creative people as measured by some psychologists is what is called divergent production. divergent production is the ability of a person to generate a diverse assortment yet an appropriate amount of responses to a given situation. one way of measuring divergent production is by administering the torrance tests of creative thinking. the torrance tests of creative thinking assesses the diversity quantity and appropriateness of participants responses to a variety of open-ended questions.

other researchers of creativity see the difference in creative people as a cognitive process of dedication to problem solving and developing expertise in the field of their creative expression. hard working people study the work of people before them and within their current area become experts in their fields and then have the ability to add to and build upon previous information in innovative and creative ways. in a study of projects by design students students who had more knowledge on their subject on average had greater creativity within their projects.

the aspect of motivation within a persons personality may predict creativity levels in the person. motivation stems from two different sources intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. intrinsic motivation is an internal drive within a person to participate or invest as a result of personal interest desires hopes goals etc. extrinsic motivation is a drive from outside of a person and might take the form of payment rewards fame approval from others etc. although extrinsic motivation and intrinsic motivation can both increase creativity in certain cases strictly extrinsic motivation often impedes creativity in people.

from a personality-traits perspective there are a number of traits that are associated with creativity in people. creative people tend to be more open to new experiences are more self-confident are more ambitious self-accepting impulsive driven dominant and hostile compared to people with less creativity.

from an evolutionary perspective creativity may be a result of the outcome of years of generating ideas. as ideas are continuously generated the need to evolve produces a need for new ideas and developments. as a result people have been creating and developing new innovative and creative ideas to build our progress as a society.

in studying exceptionally creative people in history some common traits in lifestyle and environment are often found. creative people in history usually had supportive parents but rigid and non-nurturing. most had an interest in their field at an early age and most had a highly supportive and skilled mentor in their field of interest. often the field they chose was relatively uncharted allowing for their creativity to be expressed more in a field with less previous information. most exceptionally creative people devoted almost all of their time and energy into their craft and after about a decade had a creative breakthrough of fame. their lives were marked with extreme dedication and a cycle of hard-work and breakthroughs as a result of their determination.

another theory of creative people is the investment theory of creativity. this approach suggest that there are many individual and environmental factors that must exist in precise ways for extremely high levels of creativity opposed to average levels of creativity. in the investment sense a person with their particular characteristics in their particular environment may see an opportunity to devote their time and energy into something that has been overlooked by others. the creative person develops an undervalued or under-recognised idea to the point that it is established as a new and creative idea. just like in the financial world some investments are worth the buy in while others are less productive and do not build to the extent that the investor expected. this investment theory of creativity views creativity in a unique perspective compared to others by asserting that creativity might rely to some extent on the right investment of effort being added to a field at the right time in the right way.

so called malevolent creativity is associated with the dark side of creativity. this type of creativity is not typically accepted within society and is defined by the intention to cause harm to others through original and innovative means. malevolent creativity should be distinguished from negative creativity in that negative creativity may unintentionally cause harm to others whereas malevolent creativity is explicitly malevolently motivated. while it is often associated with criminal behaviour it can also be observed in ordinary day-to-day life as lying cheating and betrayal.

malevolent creativity is often a key contributor to crime and in its most destructive form can even manifest as terrorism. as creativity requires deviating from the conventional there is a permanent tension between being creative and producing products that go too far and in some cases to the point of breaking the law. aggression is a key predictor of malevolent creativity and studies have also shown that increased levels of aggression also correlates to a higher likelihood of committing crime.

although everyone shows some levels of malevolent creativity under certain conditions those that have a higher propensity towards it have increased tendencies to deceive and manipulate others to their own gain. while malevolent creativity appears to dramatically increase when an individual is placed under unfair conditions personality particularly aggressiveness is also a key predictor in anticipating levels of malevolent thinking. researchers harris and reiter-palmon investigated the role of aggression in levels of malevolent creativity in particular levels of implicit aggression and the tendency to employ aggressive actions in response to problem solving. the personality traits of physical aggression conscientiousness emotional intelligence and implicit aggression all seem to be related with malevolent creativity. harris and reiter-palmons research showed that when subjects were presented with a problem that triggered malevolent creativity participants high in implicit aggression and low in premeditation expressed the largest number of malevolently-themed solutions. when presented with the more benign problem that triggered prosocial motives of helping others and cooperating those high in implicit aggression even if they were high in impulsiveness were far less destructive in their imagined solutions. they concluded premeditation more than implicit aggression controlled an individuals expression of malevolent creativity.

creativity is viewed differently in different countries. for example cross-cultural research centred on hong kong found that westerners view creativity more in terms of the individual attributes of a creative person such as their aesthetic taste while chinese people view creativity more in terms of the social influence of creative people e.g. what they can contribute to society. mpofu et al. surveyed  african languages and found that  had no word which directly translated to creativity the exception being arabic. the principle of linguistic relativity i.e. that language can affect thought suggests that the lack of an equivalent word for creativity may affect the views of creativity among speakers of such languages. however more research would be needed to establish this and there is certainly no suggestion that this linguistic difference makes people any less or more creative; africa has a rich heritage of creative pursuits such as music art and storytelling. nevertheless it is true that there has been very little research on creativity in africa and there has also been very little research on creativity in latin america. creativity has been more thoroughly researched in the northern hemisphere but here again there are cultural differences even between countries or groups of countries in close proximity. for example in scandinavian countries creativity is seen as an individual attitude which helps in coping with lifes challenges while in germany creativity is seen more as a process that can be applied to help solve problems.

training meeting in an eco-design stainless steel company in brazil. the leaders among other things wish to cheer and encourage the workers in order to achieve a higher level of creativity.
it has been the topic of various research studies to establish that organizational effectiveness depends on the creativity of the workforce to a large extent. for any given organization measures of effectiveness vary depending upon its mission environmental context nature of work the product or service it produces and customer demands. thus the first step in evaluating organizational effectiveness is to understand the organization itself  how it functions how it is structured and what it emphasizes.

amabile argued that to enhance creativity in business three components were needed

expertise technical procedural and intellectual knowledge
creative thinking skills how flexibly and imaginatively people approach problems
and motivation especially intrinsic motivation.
there are two types of motivation

extrinsic motivation  external factors for example threats of being fired or money as a reward
intrinsic motivation  comes from inside an individual satisfaction enjoyment of work etc.
six managerial practices to encourage motivation are

challenge  matching people with the right assignments;
freedom  giving people autonomy choosing means to achieve goals;
resources  such as time money space etc. there must be balance fit among resources and people;
work group features  diverse supportive teams where members share the excitement willingness to help and recognize each others talents;
supervisory encouragement  recognitions cheering praising;
organizational support  value emphasis information sharing collaboration.
nonaka who examined several successful japanese companies similarly saw creativity and knowledge creation as being important to the success of organizations. in particular he emphasized the role that tacit knowledge has to play in the creative process.

in business originality is not enough. the idea must also be appropriateuseful and actionable. creative competitive intelligence is a new solution to solve this problem. according to reijo siltala it links creativity to innovation process and competitive intelligence to creative workers.

creativity can be encouraged in people and professionals and in the workplace. it is essential for innovation and is a factor affecting economic growth and businesses. in  the sociologist silvia leal martn using the innova dx method suggested measuring the various parameters that encourage creativity and innovation corporate culture work environment leadership and management creativity self-esteem and optimism locus of control and learning orientation motivation and fear.

similarly social psychologists organizational scientists and management scientists who conduct extensive research on the factors that influence creativity and innovation in teams and organizations have developed integrative theoretical models that emphasize the roles of team composition team processes and organizational culture as well as the mutually reinforcing relationships between them in promoting innovation.

the investigation by loo   on creative working in the knowledge economy brings together studies of creativity as delineated in this web page. it offers connections with the sections on the four c model theories of creative processes creativity as a subset of intelligence creativity and personality and in organisations it is the last section that the investigation addresses.

research studies of the knowledge economy may be classified into three levels macro meso and micro. macro studies refer to investigations at a societal or transnational dimension. meso studies focus on organisations. micro investigations centre on the minutiae workings of workers. there is also an interdisciplinary dimension such as research from businesses e.g. burton-jones ; drucker  economics e.g. cortada ; reich ; florida  education e.g. farrell and fenwick ; brown lauder and ashton  human resource management e.g. davenport  knowledge and organizational management alvesson ; defillippi arthur and lindsay ; orr nutley russell bain hacking and moran  sociology psychology and knowledge economy-related sectors  especially information technology it software e.g. oriain ; nerland  and advertising e.g. grabher ; lury  loo .

loo  studies how individual workers in the knowledge economy use their creativity and know-how in the advertising and it software sectors. it examines this phenomenon across three developed countries of england japan and singapore to observe global perspectives. specifically the study uses qualitative data from semi-structured interviews of the related professionals in the roles of creative directing and copywriting in advertising and systems software developing and software programme managing.

the study offers a conceptual framework loo  p.  of a two-dimensional matrix of individual and collaborative working styles and single and multi-contexts. the investigation draws on literature sources from the four disciplines of economics e.g. reich ; quah  management e.g. drucker ; nonaka and takeuchi ; von hippel  sociology e.g. zuboff ; bell ; lash and urry ; castells ; knorr cetina  and psychology e.g. gardner ; csikszentmihalyi ; sternberg kaufman and pretz . the themes arising from the analysis of knowledge work and creativity literature serve to create a distinct theoretical framework of creative knowledge work. these workers apply their cognitive abilities creative personalities and skill sets in the areas of science technology or culture industries to invent or discover new possibilities  e.g. a medium product or service. these work activities may be done individually or collectively. education training and encultured environments are necessary for the performance of these creative activities. acts of creativity are viewed as asking new questions over and above those questions asked by an intelligent person seeking novelty when reviewing a situation gardner  and creating something that is different and novel i.e. a variation on the idea of existing ideas in a domain csikszentmihalyi . this framework is evidenced by the empirical chapters on the micro-workings of creative workers in the two knowledge economy sectors from global perspectives.

this investigation identifies a definition of creative work three types of work and the necessary conditions for it to occur. these workers use a combination of creative applications including anticipatory imagination problem-solving problem seeking and generating ideas and aesthetic sensibilities. taking aesthetic sensibilities as an example for a creative director in the advertising industry it is a visual imagery whether still or moving via a camera lens and for a software programmer it is the innovative technical expertise in which the software is written. there are specific creative applications for each of the sectors such as emotional connection in the advertising sector and the power of expression and sensitivity in the it software sector. in addition to the creative applications creative workers require abilities and aptitudes to carry out their roles. passion for ones job is generic. for copywriters this passion is identified with fun enjoyment and happiness alongside attributes such as honesty regarding the product confidence and patience in finding the appropriate copy. knowledge is also required in the disciplines of the humanities e.g. literature the creative arts e.g. painting and music and technical-related know-how e.g. mathematics computer sciences and physical sciences. in the it software technical knowledge of computer languages e.g. c++ is especially significant for programmers whereas the degree of technical expertise may be less for a programme manager as only knowledge of the relevant language is necessary to understand the issues for communicating with the team of developers and testers.

there are three types of work. one is intra-sectoral e.g. general sponge and in tune with the zeitgeist advertising and power of expression and sensitivity it software. the second is inter-sectoral e.g. integration of advertising activities advertising and autonomous decentralized systems ads it software. the third relates to changes in culture/practices in the sectors e.g. three-dimensional trust and green credentials advertising and collaboration with heis and industry and ads system in the tokyo train operator it software.

the necessary conditions for creative work to exist are a supportive environment such as supportive information communications and electronic technologies icet infrastructure training work environment and education.

this investigation has implications for lifelong learning of these workers informally and formally. teaching institutions need to offer multi-disciplinary knowledge of humanities arts and sciences and it has impacts on the programme structure delivery approaches and assessments. at a macro level governments need to offer a rich diet of cultural activities outdoor activities and sports fixtures that inform potential creative workers in the areas of video gaming and advertising. this study has implications for work organisations that support and encourage collaborative working alongside individual working offer opportunities to engage in continuous professional development formally and informally and foster an environment which promotes experiential functioning and supports experimentation.

diversity between team members backgrounds and knowledge can increase team creativity by expanding the total collection of unique information that is available to the team and introducing different perspectives that can integrate in novel ways. however under some conditions diversity can also decrease team creativity by making it more difficult for team members to communicate about ideas and causing interpersonal conflicts between those with different perspectives. thus the potential advantages of diversity must be supported by appropriate team processes and organizational cultures in order to enhance creativity.

team communication norms such as respecting others expertise paying attention to others ideas expecting information sharing tolerating disagreements negotiating remaining open to others ideas learning from others and building on each others ideas increase team creativity by facilitating the social processes involved with brainstorming and problem solving. through these processes team members are able to access their collective pool of knowledge reach shared understandings identify new ways of understanding problems or tasks and make new connections between ideas. engaging in these social processes also promotes positive team affect which facilitates collective creativity.

supportive and motivational environments that create psychological safety by encouraging risk taking and tolerating mistakes increase team creativity as well. organizations in which help-seeking help giving and collaboration are rewarded promote innovation by providing opportunities and contexts in which team processes that lead to collective creativity can occur. additionally leadership styles that downplay status hierarchies or power differences within an organization and empower people to speak up about their ideas or opinions also help to create cultures that are conducive to creativity.

there is a long-standing debate on how material constraints e.g. lack of money materials or equipment affect creativity. in psychological and managerial research two competing views in this regard prevail. in one view many scholars propose a negative effect of material constraints on innovation and claim that material constraints starve creativity. the proponents of this view argue that adequate material resources are needed to engage in creative activities like experimenting with new solutions and idea exploration. in an opposing view scholars assert that people tend to stick to established routines or solutions as long as they are not forced to deviate from them by constraints. in this sense neren posits that scarcity is an important driver of creativity. consistently gibbert and scranton demonstrated how material constraints facilitated the development of jet engines in world war ii.

to reconcile these competing views contingency models were proposed. the rationale behind these models is that certain contingency factors e.g. creativity climate or creativity relevant skills influence the relationship between constraints and creativity. these contingency factors reflect the need for higher levels of motivation and skills when working on creative tasks under constraints. depending on these contingency factors there is either a positive or negative relationship between constraints and creativity.

economic approaches to creativity have focussed on three aspects  the impact of creativity on economic growth methods of modelling markets for creativity and the maximisation of economic creativity innovation.

in the early th century joseph schumpeter introduced the economic theory of creative destruction to describe the way in which old ways of doing things are endogenously destroyed and replaced by the new. some economists such as paul romer view creativity as an important element in the recombination of elements to produce new technologies and products and consequently economic growth. creativity leads to capital and creative products are protected by intellectual property laws.

mark a. runco and daniel rubenson have tried to describe a psychoeconomic model of creativity. in such a model creativity is the product of endowments and active investments in creativity; the costs and benefits of bringing creative activity to market determine the supply of creativity. such an approach has been criticised for its view of creativity consumption as always having positive utility and for the way it analyses the value of future innovations.

the creative class is seen by some to be an important driver of modern economies. in his  book the rise of the creative class economist richard florida popularized the notion that regions with  ts of economic development technology talent and tolerance also have high concentrations of creative professionals and tend to have a higher level of economic development.

several different researchers have proposed methods of increasing the creativity of an individual. such ideas range from the psychological-cognitive such as osborn-parnes creative problem solving process synectics science-based creative thinking purdue creative thinking program and edward de bonos lateral thinking; to the highly structured such as triz the theory of inventive problem-solving and its variant algorithm of inventive problem solving developed by the russian scientist genrich altshuller and computer-aided morphological analysis.

daniel pink in his  book a whole new mind repeating arguments posed throughout the th century argues that we are entering a new age where creativity is becoming increasingly important. in this conceptual age we will need to foster and encourage right-directed thinking representing creativity and emotion over left-directed thinking representing logical analytical thought. however this simplification of right versus left brain thinking is not supported by the research data.

nickerson provides a summary of the various creativity techniques that have been proposed. these include approaches that have been developed by both academia and industry

establishing purpose and intention
building basic skills
encouraging acquisitions of domain-specific knowledge
stimulating and rewarding curiosity and exploration
building motivation especially internal motivation
encouraging confidence and a willingness to take risks
focusing on mastery and self-competition
promoting supportable beliefs about creativity
providing opportunities for choice and discovery
developing self-management metacognitive skills
teaching techniques and strategies for facilitating creative performance
providing balance
managing the need for closure
experiments suggest the need for closure of task participants whether as a reflection of personality or induced through time pressure negatively impacts creativity. accordingly it has been suggested that reading fiction which can reduce the cognitive need for closure may help to encourage creativity.

some see the conventional system of schooling as stifling of creativity and attempt particularly in the preschool/kindergarten and early school years to provide a creativity-friendly rich imagination-fostering environment for young children. researchers have seen this as important because technology is advancing our society at an unprecedented rate and creative problem solving will be needed to cope with these challenges as they arise. in addition to helping with problem solving creativity also helps students identify problems where others have failed to do so. see the waldorf school as an example of an education program that promotes creative thought.

promoting intrinsic motivation and problem solving are two areas where educators can foster creativity in students. students are more creative when they see a task as intrinsically motivating valued for its own sake. to promote creative thinking educators need to identify what motivates their students and structure teaching around it. providing students with a choice of activities to complete allows them to become more intrinsically motivated and therefore creative in completing the tasks.

teaching students to solve problems that do not have well defined answers is another way to foster their creativity. this is accomplished by allowing students to explore problems and redefine them possibly drawing on knowledge that at first may seem unrelated to the problem in order to solve it. in adults mentoring individuals is another way to foster their creativiy. however the benefits of mentoring creativity apply only to creative contributions considered great in a given field not to everyday creative expression.

in the scottish education system creativity is identified as a core skillset for learning life and work and is defined as a process which generates ideas that have value to the individual. it involves looking at familiar things with a fresh eye examining problems with an open mind making connections learning from mistakes and using imagination to explore new possibilities.  the need to develop a shared language and understanding of creativity and its role across every aspect of learning teaching and continuous improvement was identified as a necessary aim  and a set of four skills is used to allow educators to discuss and develop creativity skills across all subjects and sectors of education  curiosity openmindedness imagination and problem solving.  distinctions are made between creative learning when learners are using their creativity skills creative teaching when educators are using their creativity skills and creative change when creativity skills are applied to planning and improvement.  scotlands national creative learning plan  supports the development of creativity skills in all learners and of educators expertise in developing creativity skills. a range of resources have been created to support and assess this  including a national review of creativity across learning by her majestys inspectorate for education. 

danah zohar coined the term spiritual intelligence and introduced the idea in  in her book rewiring the corporate brain.

in the same year  ken odonnell an australian author and consultant living in brazil also introduced the term spiritual intelligence in his book endoquality - the emotional and spiritual dimensions of the human being in organizations.

in  in the book spiritual intelligence author steven benedict outlined the concept as a perspective offering a way to bring together the spiritual and the material that is ultimately concerned with the well-being of the universe and all who live there.

howard gardner the originator of the theory of multiple intelligences chose not to include spiritual intelligence in his intelligences due to the challenge of codifying quantifiable scientific criteria. instead gardner suggested an existential intelligence as viable. however contemporary researchers continue to explore the viability of spiritual intelligence often abbreviated as sq and to create tools for measuring and developing it. so far measurement of spiritual intelligence has tended to rely on self-assessment instruments which can be susceptible to false or unreliable reporting.

variations of spiritual intelligence are sometimes used in corporate settings as a means of motivating employees. and providing a non-religious diversity-sensitive framework for addressing issues of values in the workplace. according to stephen covey spiritual intelligence is the central and most fundamental of all the intelligences because it becomes the source of guidance for the others.

definitions of spiritual intelligence rely on the concept of spirituality as being distinct from religiosity - existential intelligence.

danah zohar defined  principles underlying spiritual intelligence

self-awareness knowing what i believe in and value and what deeply motivates me.
spontaneity living in and being responsive to the moment.
being vision- and value-led acting from principles and deep beliefs and living accordingly.
holism seeing larger patterns relationships and connections; having a sense of belonging.
compassion having the quality of feeling-with and deep empathy.
celebration of diversity valuing other people for their differences not despite them.
field independence standing against the crowd and having ones own convictions.
humility having the sense of being a player in a larger drama of ones true place in the world.
tendency to ask fundamental why questions needing to understand things and get to the bottom of them.
ability to reframe standing back from a situation or problem and seeing the bigger picture or wider context.
positive use of adversity learning and growing from mistakes setbacks and suffering.
sense of vocation feeling called upon to serve to give something back.
ken odonnell advocates the integration of spiritual intelligence sq with both rational intelligence iq and emotional intelligence eq. iq helps us to interact with numbers formulas and things eq helps us to interact with people and sq helps us to maintain inner balance. to calculate ones level of sq he suggests the following criteria

how much time money and energy and thoughts do we need to obtain a desired result.
how much bilateral respect there exists in our relationships.
how clean a game we play with others.
how much dignity we retain in respecting the dignity of others.
how tranquil we remain in spite of the workload.
how sensible our decisions are.
how stable we remain in upsetting situations.
how easily we see virtues in others instead of defects.
robert emmons defines spiritual intelligence as the adaptive use of spiritual information to facilitate everyday problem solving and goal attainment. he originally proposed  components of spiritual intelligence

the capacity to transcend the physical and material.
the ability to experience heightened states of consciousness.
the ability to sanctify everyday experience.
the ability to utilize spiritual resources to solve problems.
the capacity to be virtuous.
higher level of intelligence and self awareness.
early maturing
control over emotions.
the fifth capacity was later removed due to its focus on human behavior rather than ability thereby not meeting previously established scientific criteria for intelligence.

frances vaughan offers the following description spiritual intelligence is concerned with the inner life of mind and spirit and its relationship to being in the world.

cindy wigglesworth defines spiritual intelligence as the ability to act with wisdom and compassion while maintaining inner and outer peace regardless of the circumstances. she breaks down the competencies that comprise sq into  skills arranged into a four quadrant model similar to daniel golemans widely used model of emotional intelligence or eq. the four quadrants of spiritual intelligence are defined as


david b. king has undertaken research on spiritual intelligence at trent university in peterborough ontario canada. king defines spiritual intelligence as a set of adaptive mental capacities based on non-material and transcendent aspects of reality specifically those that

...contribute to the awareness integration and adaptive application of the nonmaterial and transcendent aspects of ones existence leading to such outcomes as deep existential reflection enhancement of meaning recognition of a transcendent self and mastery of spiritual states.

king further proposes four core abilities or capacities of spiritual intelligence

critical existential thinking the capacity to critically contemplate the nature of existence reality the universe space time and other existential/metaphysical issues; also the capacity to contemplate non-existential issues in relation to ones existence i.e. from an existential perspective.
personal meaning production the ability to derive personal meaning and purpose from all physical and mental experiences including the capacity to create and master a life purpose.
transcendental awareness the capacity to identify transcendent dimensions/patterns of the self i.e. a transpersonal or transcendent self of others and of the physical world e.g. nonmaterialism during normal states of consciousness accompanied by the capacity to identify their relationship to ones self and to the physical.
conscious state expansion the ability to enter and exit higher states of consciousness e.g. pure consciousness cosmic consciousness unity oneness and other states of trance at ones own discretion as in deep contemplation meditation prayer etc..
also vineeth v. kumar and manju mehta have also researched the concept extensively. operationalizing the construct they defined spiritual intelligence as the capacity of an individual to possess a socially relevant purpose in life by understanding self and having a high degree of conscience compassion and commitment to human values.

measurement of spiritual intelligence relies on self-reporting. david king and teresa l. decicco have developed a self-report measure the spiritual intelligence self-report inventory sisri- with psychometric and statistical support across two large university samples. cindy wigglesworth has developed the sq a self-assessment inventory that has tested positively for criterion validity and construct validity in statistically significant samples. wigglesworths sq model and assessment instrument have been successfully used in corporate settings.

the scale for spiritual intelligence ssi; kumar & mehta  is a -item self-report measure of spiritual intelligence in adolescents. the idea behind the development of this scale was to generate and assess the concept of spiritual intelligence in the collectivist culture bounded with eastern philosophy. the ssi is rated on a likert scale and can be completed in  minutes. the -item spiritual intelligence questionnairethis test was normalized by abdollahzadeh with the collaboration of mahdieh kashmiri and fatemeh arabameri on students. the normal group was  people  of whom were the students of gorgan university of natural resources and  students of payame noor university of behshahr. of these  were female and  were male. first a -item questionnaire was prepared by the test developers and implemented on  students.the reliability of the test in the initial phase was . by the alpha method. in the analysis of the question by loop method  questions were removed and the final questionnaire was adjusted with  phrases. at the final stage the questionnaire was implemented on  subjects and the reliability was . at this stage. factor analysis was used to evaluate validity in addition to formal content validity that the questions were confirmed by the experts colleagues and the correlation of all questions was higher than .. in varimax rotation two major factors were found to reduce variables. the first factor with  question was called understanding and communicating with the source of universe and the second factor with  items was called spiritual life or reliance on the inner core. the first factor included the questions             and the second factor included the questions                 . 

it has been argued that spiritual intelligence cannot be recognized as a form of intelligence. howard gardner originator of multiple intelligence theory chose not to include spiritual intelligence amongst his intelligences due to the challenge of codifying quantifiable scientific criteria. later gardner suggested an existential intelligence as viable but argued that it was better to

put aside the term spiritual with its manifest and problematic connotations and to speak instead of an intelligence that explores the nature of existence in its multifarious guises. thus an explicit concern with spiritual or religious matters would be one variety  often the most important variety  of an existential intelligence.
preface


supposing that truth is a woman--what then is there not ground
for suspecting that all philosophers in so far as they have been
dogmatists have failed to understand women--that the terrible
seriousness and clumsy importunity with which they have usually paid
their addresses to truth have been unskilled and unseemly methods for
winning a woman certainly she has never allowed herself to be won; and
at present every kind of dogma stands with sad and discouraged mien--if
indeed it stands at all! for there are scoffers who maintain that it
has fallen that all dogma lies on the ground--nay more that it is at
its last gasp. but to speak seriously there are good grounds for hoping
that all dogmatizing in philosophy whatever solemn whatever conclusive
and decided airs it has assumed may have been only a noble puerilism
and tyronism; and probably the time is at hand when it will be once
and again understood what has actually sufficed for the basis of such
imposing and absolute philosophical edifices as the dogmatists have
hitherto reared perhaps some popular superstition of immemorial time
such as the soul-superstition which in the form of subject- and
ego-superstition has not yet ceased doing mischief perhaps some
play upon words a deception on the part of grammar or an
audacious generalization of very restricted very personal very
human--all-too-human facts. the philosophy of the dogmatists it is to
be hoped was only a promise for thousands of years afterwards as was
astrology in still earlier times in the service of which probably more
labour gold acuteness and patience have been spent than on any
actual science hitherto we owe to it and to its super-terrestrial
pretensions in asia and egypt the grand style of architecture. it seems
that in order to inscribe themselves upon the heart of humanity with
everlasting claims all great things have first to wander about the
earth as enormous and awe-inspiring caricatures dogmatic philosophy has
been a caricature of this kind--for instance the vedanta doctrine in
asia and platonism in europe. let us not be ungrateful to it although
it must certainly be confessed that the worst the most tiresome
and the most dangerous of errors hitherto has been a dogmatist
error--namely platos invention of pure spirit and the good in itself.
but now when it has been surmounted when europe rid of this nightmare
can again draw breath freely and at least enjoy a healthier--sleep
we whose duty is wakefulness itself are the heirs of all the strength
which the struggle against this error has fostered. it amounted to
the very inversion of truth and the denial of the perspective--the
fundamental condition--of life to speak of spirit and the good as plato
spoke of them; indeed one might ask as a physician how did such a
malady attack that finest product of antiquity plato had the wicked
socrates really corrupted him was socrates after all a corrupter of
youths and deserved his hemlock but the struggle against plato
or--to speak plainer and for the people--the struggle against
the ecclesiastical oppression of millenniums of christianity for
christianity is platonism for the people produced in europe
a magnificent tension of soul such as had not existed anywhere
previously; with such a tensely strained bow one can now aim at the
furthest goals. as a matter of fact the european feels this tension as
a state of distress and twice attempts have been made in grand style to
unbend the bow once by means of jesuitism and the second time by means
of democratic enlightenment--which with the aid of liberty of the press
and newspaper-reading might in fact bring it about that the spirit
would not so easily find itself in distress! the germans invented
gunpowder--all credit to them! but they again made things square--they
invented printing. but we who are neither jesuits nor democrats
nor even sufficiently germans we good europeans and free very free
spirits--we have it still all the distress of spirit and all the
tension of its bow! and perhaps also the arrow the duty and who
knows the goal to aim at....

sils maria upper engadine june .




chapter i. prejudices of philosophers


. the will to truth which is to tempt us to many a hazardous
enterprise the famous truthfulness of which all philosophers have
hitherto spoken with respect what questions has this will to truth not
laid before us! what strange perplexing questionable questions! it is
already a long story; yet it seems as if it were hardly commenced. is
it any wonder if we at last grow distrustful lose patience and turn
impatiently away that this sphinx teaches us at last to ask questions
ourselves who is it really that puts questions to us here what really
is this will to truth in us in fact we made a long halt at the
question as to the origin of this will--until at last we came to an
absolute standstill before a yet more fundamental question. we inquired
about the value of this will. granted that we want the truth why not
rather untruth and uncertainty even ignorance the problem of the
value of truth presented itself before us--or was it we who presented
ourselves before the problem which of us is the oedipus here which
the sphinx it would seem to be a rendezvous of questions and notes of
interrogation. and could it be believed that it at last seems to us as
if the problem had never been propounded before as if we were the first
to discern it get a sight of it and risk raising it for there is risk
in raising it perhaps there is no greater risk.

. how could anything originate out of its opposite for example truth
out of error or the will to truth out of the will to deception or the
generous deed out of selfishness or the pure sun-bright vision of the
wise man out of covetousness such genesis is impossible; whoever dreams
of it is a fool nay worse than a fool; things of the highest
value must have a different origin an origin of their own--in this
transitory seductive illusory paltry world in this turmoil of
delusion and cupidity they cannot have their source. but rather in
the lap of being in the intransitory in the concealed god in the
thing-in-itself--there must be their source and nowhere else!--this
mode of reasoning discloses the typical prejudice by which
metaphysicians of all times can be recognized this mode of valuation
is at the back of all their logical procedure; through this belief of
theirs they exert themselves for their knowledge for something that
is in the end solemnly christened the truth. the fundamental belief of
metaphysicians is the belief in antitheses of values. it never occurred
even to the wariest of them to doubt here on the very threshold where
doubt however was most necessary; though they had made a solemn
vow de omnibus dubitandum. for it may be doubted firstly whether
antitheses exist at all; and secondly whether the popular valuations
and antitheses of value upon which metaphysicians have set their
seal are not perhaps merely superficial estimates merely provisional
perspectives besides being probably made from some corner perhaps from
below--frog perspectives as it were to borrow an expression current
among painters. in spite of all the value which may belong to the true
the positive and the unselfish it might be possible that a higher
and more fundamental value for life generally should be assigned to
pretence to the will to delusion to selfishness and cupidity. it
might even be possible that what constitutes the value of those good and
respected things consists precisely in their being insidiously
related knotted and crocheted to these evil and apparently opposed
things--perhaps even in being essentially identical with them. perhaps!
but who wishes to concern himself with such dangerous perhapses!
for that investigation one must await the advent of a new order of
philosophers such as will have other tastes and inclinations the
reverse of those hitherto prevalent--philosophers of the dangerous
perhaps in every sense of the term. and to speak in all seriousness i
see such new philosophers beginning to appear.

. having kept a sharp eye on philosophers and having read between
their lines long enough i now say to myself that the greater part of
conscious thinking must be counted among the instinctive functions and
it is so even in the case of philosophical thinking; one has here to
learn anew as one learned anew about heredity and innateness. as
little as the act of birth comes into consideration in the whole process
and procedure of heredity just as little is being-conscious opposed
to the instinctive in any decisive sense; the greater part of the
conscious thinking of a philosopher is secretly influenced by his
instincts and forced into definite channels. and behind all logic and
its seeming sovereignty of movement there are valuations or to speak
more plainly physiological demands for the maintenance of a definite
mode of life for example that the certain is worth more than the
uncertain that illusion is less valuable than truth such valuations
in spite of their regulative importance for us might notwithstanding be
only superficial valuations special kinds of _niaiserie_ such as may
be necessary for the maintenance of beings such as ourselves. supposing
in effect that man is not just the measure of things.

. the falseness of an opinion is not for us any objection to it it is
here perhaps that our new language sounds most strangely. the
question is how far an opinion is life-furthering life-preserving
species-preserving perhaps species-rearing and we are fundamentally
inclined to maintain that the falsest opinions to which the synthetic
judgments a priori belong are the most indispensable to us that
without a recognition of logical fictions without a comparison of
reality with the purely imagined world of the absolute and immutable
without a constant counterfeiting of the world by means of numbers
man could not live--that the renunciation of false opinions would be
a renunciation of life a negation of life. to recognise untruth as a
condition of life; that is certainly to impugn the traditional ideas of
value in a dangerous manner and a philosophy which ventures to do so
has thereby alone placed itself beyond good and evil.

. that which causes philosophers to be regarded half-distrustfully
and half-mockingly is not the oft-repeated discovery how innocent they
are--how often and easily they make mistakes and lose their way in
short how childish and childlike they are--but that there is not
enough honest dealing with them whereas they all raise a loud and
virtuous outcry when the problem of truthfulness is even hinted at in
the remotest manner. they all pose as though their real opinions had
been discovered and attained through the self-evolving of a cold pure
divinely indifferent dialectic in contrast to all sorts of mystics
who fairer and foolisher talk of inspiration whereas in fact a
prejudiced proposition idea or suggestion which is generally
their hearts desire abstracted and refined is defended by them with
arguments sought out after the event. they are all advocates who do not
wish to be regarded as such generally astute defenders also of their
prejudices which they dub truths--and very far from having the
conscience which bravely admits this to itself very far from having
the good taste of the courage which goes so far as to let this be
understood perhaps to warn friend or foe or in cheerful confidence
and self-ridicule. the spectacle of the tartuffery of old kant equally
stiff and decent with which he entices us into the dialectic
by-ways that lead more correctly mislead to his categorical
imperative--makes us fastidious ones smile we who find no small
amusement in spying out the subtle tricks of old moralists and ethical
preachers. or still more so the hocus-pocus in mathematical form by
means of which spinoza has as it were clad his philosophy in mail and
mask--in fact the love of his wisdom to translate the term fairly
and squarely--in order thereby to strike terror at once into the heart
of the assailant who should dare to cast a glance on that invincible
maiden that pallas athene--how much of personal timidity and
vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray!

. it has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up
till now has consisted of--namely the confession of its originator and
a species of involuntary and unconscious auto-biography; and moreover
that the moral or immoral purpose in every philosophy has constituted
the true vital germ out of which the entire plant has always grown.
indeed to understand how the abstrusest metaphysical assertions of a
philosopher have been arrived at it is always well and wise to first
ask oneself what morality do they or does he aim at accordingly
i do not believe that an impulse to knowledge is the father of
philosophy; but that another impulse here as elsewhere has only made
use of knowledge and mistaken knowledge! as an instrument. but whoever
considers the fundamental impulses of man with a view to determining
how far they may have here acted as inspiring genii or as demons and
cobolds will find that they have all practiced philosophy at one time
or another and that each one of them would have been only too glad to
look upon itself as the ultimate end of existence and the legitimate
lord over all the other impulses. for every impulse is imperious and as
such attempts to philosophize. to be sure in the case of scholars in
the case of really scientific men it may be otherwise--better if
you will; there there may really be such a thing as an impulse to
knowledge some kind of small independent clock-work which when well
wound up works away industriously to that end without the rest of
the scholarly impulses taking any material part therein. the actual
interests of the scholar therefore are generally in quite another
direction--in the family perhaps or in money-making or in politics;
it is in fact almost indifferent at what point of research his little
machine is placed and whether the hopeful young worker becomes a
good philologist a mushroom specialist or a chemist; he is not
characterised by becoming this or that. in the philosopher on the
contrary there is absolutely nothing impersonal; and above all
his morality furnishes a decided and decisive testimony as to who he
is--that is to say in what order the deepest impulses of his nature
stand to each other.

. how malicious philosophers can be! i know of nothing more stinging
than the joke epicurus took the liberty of making on plato and the
platonists; he called them dionysiokolakes. in its original sense
and on the face of it the word signifies flatterers of
dionysius--consequently tyrants accessories and lick-spittles;
besides this however it is as much as to say they are all actors
there is nothing genuine about them for dionysiokolax was a popular
name for an actor. and the latter is really the malignant reproach that
epicurus cast upon plato he was annoyed by the grandiose manner the
mise en scene style of which plato and his scholars were masters--of
which epicurus was not a master! he the old school-teacher of samos
who sat concealed in his little garden at athens and wrote three
hundred books perhaps out of rage and ambitious envy of plato who
knows! greece took a hundred years to find out who the garden-god
epicurus really was. did she ever find out

. there is a point in every philosophy at which the conviction of
the philosopher appears on the scene; or to put it in the words of an
ancient mystery

adventavit asinus pulcher et fortissimus.

. you desire to live according to nature oh you noble stoics what
fraud of words! imagine to yourselves a being like nature boundlessly
extravagant boundlessly indifferent without purpose or consideration
without pity or justice at once fruitful and barren and uncertain
imagine to yourselves indifference as a power--how could you live
in accordance with such indifference to live--is not that just
endeavouring to be otherwise than this nature is not living valuing
preferring being unjust being limited endeavouring to be different
and granted that your imperative living according to nature means
actually the same as living according to life--how could you do
differently why should you make a principle out of what you yourselves
are and must be in reality however it is quite otherwise with you
while you pretend to read with rapture the canon of your law in nature
you want something quite the contrary you extraordinary stage-players
and self-deluders! in your pride you wish to dictate your morals and
ideals to nature to nature herself and to incorporate them therein;
you insist that it shall be nature according to the stoa and would
like everything to be made after your own image as a vast eternal
glorification and generalism of stoicism! with all your love for truth
you have forced yourselves so long so persistently and with such
hypnotic rigidity to see nature falsely that is to say stoically
that you are no longer able to see it otherwise--and to crown all some
unfathomable superciliousness gives you the bedlamite hope that
because you are able to tyrannize over yourselves--stoicism is
self-tyranny--nature will also allow herself to be tyrannized over is
not the stoic a part of nature... but this is an old and everlasting
story what happened in old times with the stoics still happens today
as soon as ever a philosophy begins to believe in itself. it always
creates the world in its own image; it cannot do otherwise; philosophy
is this tyrannical impulse itself the most spiritual will to power the
will to creation of the world the will to the causa prima.

. the eagerness and subtlety i should even say craftiness with
which the problem of the real and the apparent world is dealt with at
present throughout europe furnishes food for thought and attention; and
he who hears only a will to truth in the background and nothing else
cannot certainly boast of the sharpest ears. in rare and isolated
cases it may really have happened that such a will to truth--a certain
extravagant and adventurous pluck a metaphysicians ambition of the
forlorn hope--has participated therein that which in the end always
prefers a handful of certainty to a whole cartload of beautiful
possibilities; there may even be puritanical fanatics of conscience
who prefer to put their last trust in a sure nothing rather than in an
uncertain something. but that is nihilism and the sign of a despairing
mortally wearied soul notwithstanding the courageous bearing such a
virtue may display. it seems however to be otherwise with stronger
and livelier thinkers who are still eager for life. in that they side
against appearance and speak superciliously of perspective in
that they rank the credibility of their own bodies about as low as the
credibility of the ocular evidence that the earth stands still and
thus apparently allowing with complacency their securest possession
to escape for what does one at present believe in more firmly than
in ones body--who knows if they are not really trying to win back
something which was formerly an even securer possession something
of the old domain of the faith of former times perhaps the immortal
soul perhaps the old god in short ideas by which they could live
better that is to say more vigorously and more joyously than by
modern ideas there is distrust of these modern ideas in this mode
of looking at things a disbelief in all that has been constructed
yesterday and today; there is perhaps some slight admixture of satiety
and scorn which can no longer endure the bric-a-brac of ideas of the
most varied origin such as so-called positivism at present throws on
the market; a disgust of the more refined taste at the village-fair
motleyness and patchiness of all these reality-philosophasters in whom
there is nothing either new or true except this motleyness. therein it
seems to me that we should agree with those skeptical anti-realists and
knowledge-microscopists of the present day; their instinct which repels
them from modern reality is unrefuted... what do their retrograde
by-paths concern us! the main thing about them is not that they wish
to go back but that they wish to get away therefrom. a little more
strength swing courage and artistic power and they would be off--and
not back!

. it seems to me that there is everywhere an attempt at present to
divert attention from the actual influence which kant exercised on
german philosophy and especially to ignore prudently the value which
he set upon himself. kant was first and foremost proud of his table of
categories; with it in his hand he said this is the most difficult
thing that could ever be undertaken on behalf of metaphysics. let us
only understand this could be! he was proud of having discovered a
new faculty in man the faculty of synthetic judgment a priori. granting
that he deceived himself in this matter; the development and rapid
flourishing of german philosophy depended nevertheless on his pride and
on the eager rivalry of the younger generation to discover if possible
something--at all events new faculties--of which to be still
prouder!--but let us reflect for a moment--it is high time to do so.
how are synthetic judgments a priori possible kant asks himself--and
what is really his answer by means of a means faculty--but
unfortunately not in five words but so circumstantially imposingly
and with such display of german profundity and verbal flourishes that
one altogether loses sight of the comical niaiserie allemande involved
in such an answer. people were beside themselves with delight over this
new faculty and the jubilation reached its climax when kant further
discovered a moral faculty in man--for at that time germans were still
moral not yet dabbling in the politics of hard fact. then came
the honeymoon of german philosophy. all the young theologians of the
tubingen institution went immediately into the groves--all seeking for
faculties. and what did they not find--in that innocent rich and
still youthful period of the german spirit to which romanticism the
malicious fairy piped and sang when one could not yet distinguish
between finding and inventing! above all a faculty for the
transcendental; schelling christened it intellectual intuition
and thereby gratified the most earnest longings of the naturally
pious-inclined germans. one can do no greater wrong to the whole of
this exuberant and eccentric movement which was really youthfulness
notwithstanding that it disguised itself so boldly in hoary and senile
conceptions than to take it seriously or even treat it with moral
indignation. enough however--the world grew older and the dream
vanished. a time came when people rubbed their foreheads and they still
rub them today. people had been dreaming and first and foremost--old
kant. by means of a means faculty--he had said or at least meant to
say. but is that--an answer an explanation or is it not rather merely
a repetition of the question how does opium induce sleep by means of
a means faculty namely the virtus dormitiva replies the doctor in
moliere

    quia est in eo virtus dormitiva
    cujus est natura sensus assoupire.

but such replies belong to the realm of comedy and it is high time
to replace the kantian question how are synthetic judgments a priori
possible by another question why is belief in such judgments
necessary--in effect it is high time that we should understand
that such judgments must be believed to be true for the sake of the
preservation of creatures like ourselves; though they still might
naturally be false judgments! or more plainly spoken and roughly and
readily--synthetic judgments a priori should not be possible at all;
we have no right to them; in our mouths they are nothing but false
judgments. only of course the belief in their truth is necessary as
plausible belief and ocular evidence belonging to the perspective view
of life. and finally to call to mind the enormous influence which
german philosophy--i hope you understand its right to inverted commas
goosefeet--has exercised throughout the whole of europe there is
no doubt that a certain virtus dormitiva had a share in it; thanks to
german philosophy it was a delight to the noble idlers the virtuous
the mystics the artiste the three-fourths christians and the
political obscurantists of all nations to find an antidote to the still
overwhelming sensualism which overflowed from the last century into
this in short--sensus assoupire....

. as regards materialistic atomism it is one of the best-refuted
theories that have been advanced and in europe there is now perhaps
no one in the learned world so unscholarly as to attach serious
signification to it except for convenient everyday use as an
abbreviation of the means of expression--thanks chiefly to the pole
boscovich he and the pole copernicus have hitherto been the greatest
and most successful opponents of ocular evidence. for while copernicus
has persuaded us to believe contrary to all the senses that the earth
does not stand fast boscovich has taught us to abjure the belief in the
last thing that stood fast of the earth--the belief in substance in
matter in the earth-residuum and particle-atom it is the greatest
triumph over the senses that has hitherto been gained on earth. one
must however go still further and also declare war relentless war
to the knife against the atomistic requirements which still lead a
dangerous after-life in places where no one suspects them like the more
celebrated metaphysical requirements one must also above all give
the finishing stroke to that other and more portentous atomism which
christianity has taught best and longest the soul-atomism. let it be
permitted to designate by this expression the belief which regards the
soul as something indestructible eternal indivisible as a monad
as an atomon this belief ought to be expelled from science! between
ourselves it is not at all necessary to get rid of the soul thereby
and thus renounce one of the oldest and most venerated hypotheses--as
happens frequently to the clumsiness of naturalists who can hardly
touch on the soul without immediately losing it. but the way is open
for new acceptations and refinements of the soul-hypothesis; and such
conceptions as mortal soul and soul of subjective multiplicity
and soul as social structure of the instincts and passions want
henceforth to have legitimate rights in science. in that the new
psychologist is about to put an end to the superstitions which have
hitherto flourished with almost tropical luxuriance around the idea of
the soul he is really as it were thrusting himself into a new desert
and a new distrust--it is possible that the older psychologists had a
merrier and more comfortable time of it; eventually however he finds
that precisely thereby he is also condemned to invent--and who knows
perhaps to discover the new.

. psychologists should bethink themselves before putting down the
instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic
being. a living thing seeks above all to discharge its strength--life
itself is will to power; self-preservation is only one of the indirect
and most frequent results thereof. in short here as everywhere else
let us beware of superfluous teleological principles!--one of which
is the instinct of self-preservation we owe it to spinozas
inconsistency. it is thus in effect that method ordains which must
be essentially economy of principles.

. it is perhaps just dawning on five or six minds that natural
philosophy is only a world-exposition and world-arrangement according
to us if i may say so! and not a world-explanation; but in so far as
it is based on belief in the senses it is regarded as more and for a
long time to come must be regarded as more--namely as an explanation.
it has eyes and fingers of its own it has ocular evidence and
palpableness of its own this operates fascinatingly persuasively and
convincingly upon an age with fundamentally plebeian tastes--in fact it
follows instinctively the canon of truth of eternal popular sensualism.
what is clear what is explained only that which can be seen and
felt--one must pursue every problem thus far. obversely however the
charm of the platonic mode of thought which was an aristocratic mode
consisted precisely in resistance to obvious sense-evidence--perhaps
among men who enjoyed even stronger and more fastidious senses than our
contemporaries but who knew how to find a higher triumph in remaining
masters of them and this by means of pale cold grey conceptional
networks which they threw over the motley whirl of the senses--the
mob of the senses as plato said. in this overcoming of the world and
interpreting of the world in the manner of plato there was an enjoyment
different from that which the physicists of today offer us--and likewise
the darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers
with their principle of the smallest possible effort and the greatest
possible blunder. where there is nothing more to see or to grasp there
is also nothing more for men to do--that is certainly an imperative
different from the platonic one but it may notwithstanding be the right
imperative for a hardy laborious race of machinists and bridge-builders
of the future who have nothing but rough work to perform.

. to study physiology with a clear conscience one must insist on
the fact that the sense-organs are not phenomena in the sense of the
idealistic philosophy; as such they certainly could not be causes!
sensualism therefore at least as regulative hypothesis if not as
heuristic principle. what and others say even that the external world
is the work of our organs but then our body as a part of this external
world would be the work of our organs! but then our organs themselves
would be the work of our organs! it seems to me that this is a
complete reductio ad absurdum if the conception causa sui is something
fundamentally absurd. consequently the external world is not the work
of our organs--

. there are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are
immediate certainties; for instance i think or as the superstition
of schopenhauer puts it i will; as though cognition here got hold
of its object purely and simply as the thing in itself without any
falsification taking place either on the part of the subject or the
object. i would repeat it however a hundred times that immediate
certainty as well as absolute knowledge and the thing in itself
involve a contradictio in adjecto; we really ought to free ourselves
from the misleading significance of words! the people on their part may
think that cognition is knowing all about things but the philosopher
must say to himself when i analyze the process that is expressed in
the sentence i think i find a whole series of daring assertions the
argumentative proof of which would be difficult perhaps impossible
for instance that it is _i_ who think that there must necessarily be
something that thinks that thinking is an activity and operation on the
part of a being who is thought of as a cause that there is an ego
and finally that it is already determined what is to be designated by
thinking--that i know what thinking is. for if i had not already decided
within myself what it is by what standard could i determine whether
that which is just happening is not perhaps willing or feeling in
short the assertion i think assumes that i compare my state at the
present moment with other states of myself which i know in order to
determine what it is; on account of this retrospective connection with
further knowledge it has at any rate no immediate certainty for
me.--in place of the immediate certainty in which the people may
believe in the special case the philosopher thus finds a series of
metaphysical questions presented to him veritable conscience questions
of the intellect to wit whence did i get the notion of thinking
why do i believe in cause and effect what gives me the right to speak
of an ego and even of an ego as cause and finally of an ego
as cause of thought he who ventures to answer these metaphysical
questions at once by an appeal to a sort of intuitive perception like
the person who says i think and know that this at least is
true actual and certain--will encounter a smile and two notes of
interrogation in a philosopher nowadays. sir the philosopher will
perhaps give him to understand it is improbable that you are not
mistaken but why should it be the truth

. with regard to the superstitions of logicians i shall never tire
of emphasizing a small terse fact which is unwillingly recognized by
these credulous minds--namely that a thought comes when it wishes
and not when i wish; so that it is a perversion of the facts of the
case to say that the subject i is the condition of the predicate
think. one thinks; but that this one is precisely the famous old
ego is to put it mildly only a supposition an assertion and
assuredly not an immediate certainty. after all one has even gone too
far with this one thinks--even the one contains an interpretation of
the process and does not belong to the process itself. one infers here
according to the usual grammatical formula--to think is an activity;
every activity requires an agency that is active; consequently... it
was pretty much on the same lines that the older atomism sought besides
the operating power the material particle wherein it resides and out
of which it operates--the atom. more rigorous minds however learnt at
last to get along without this earth-residuum and perhaps some day we
shall accustom ourselves even from the logicians point of view to
get along without the little one to which the worthy old ego has
refined itself.

. it is certainly not the least charm of a theory that it is
refutable; it is precisely thereby that it attracts the more subtle
minds. it seems that the hundred-times-refuted theory of the free will
owes its persistence to this charm alone; some one is always appearing
who feels himself strong enough to refute it.

. philosophers are accustomed to speak of the will as though it were
the best-known thing in the world; indeed schopenhauer has given us
to understand that the will alone is really known to us absolutely and
completely known without deduction or addition. but it again and
again seems to me that in this case schopenhauer also only did what
philosophers are in the habit of doing--he seems to have adopted a
popular prejudice and exaggerated it. willing seems to me to be above
all something complicated something that is a unity only in name--and
it is precisely in a name that popular prejudice lurks which has got
the mastery over the inadequate precautions of philosophers in all ages.
so let us for once be more cautious let us be unphilosophical let
us say that in all willing there is firstly a plurality of sensations
namely the sensation of the condition away from which we go the
sensation of the condition towards which we go the sensation of this
from and towards itself and then besides an accompanying muscular
sensation which even without our putting in motion arms and legs
commences its action by force of habit directly we will anything.
therefore just as sensations and indeed many kinds of sensations are
to be recognized as ingredients of the will so in the second place
thinking is also to be recognized; in every act of the will there is
a ruling thought;--and let us not imagine it possible to sever this
thought from the willing as if the will would then remain over!
in the third place the will is not only a complex of sensation and
thinking but it is above all an emotion and in fact the emotion of the
command. that which is termed freedom of the will is essentially the
emotion of supremacy in respect to him who must obey i am free he
must obey--this consciousness is inherent in every will; and equally
so the straining of the attention the straight look which fixes itself
exclusively on one thing the unconditional judgment that this and
nothing else is necessary now the inward certainty that obedience
will be rendered--and whatever else pertains to the position of the
commander. a man who wills commands something within himself which
renders obedience or which he believes renders obedience. but now let
us notice what is the strangest thing about the will--this affair so
extremely complex for which the people have only one name. inasmuch as
in the given circumstances we are at the same time the commanding and
the obeying parties and as the obeying party we know the sensations of
constraint impulsion pressure resistance and motion which usually
commence immediately after the act of will; inasmuch as on the other
hand we are accustomed to disregard this duality and to deceive
ourselves about it by means of the synthetic term i a whole series
of erroneous conclusions and consequently of false judgments about the
will itself has become attached to the act of willing--to such a degree
that he who wills believes firmly that willing suffices for action.
since in the majority of cases there has only been exercise of will
when the effect of the command--consequently obedience and therefore
action--was to be expected the appearance has translated itself into
the sentiment as if there were a necessity of effect; in a word he who
wills believes with a fair amount of certainty that will and action are
somehow one; he ascribes the success the carrying out of the willing
to the will itself and thereby enjoys an increase of the sensation
of power which accompanies all success. freedom of will--that is the
expression for the complex state of delight of the person exercising
volition who commands and at the same time identifies himself with
the executor of the order--who as such enjoys also the triumph over
obstacles but thinks within himself that it was really his own will
that overcame them. in this way the person exercising volition adds the
feelings of delight of his successful executive instruments the useful
underwills or under-souls--indeed our body is but a social structure
composed of many souls--to his feelings of delight as commander. leffet
cest moi. what happens here is what happens in every well-constructed
and happy commonwealth namely that the governing class identifies
itself with the successes of the commonwealth. in all willing it is
absolutely a question of commanding and obeying on the basis as
already said of a social structure composed of many souls on which
account a philosopher should claim the right to include willing-as-such
within the sphere of morals--regarded as the doctrine of the relations
of supremacy under which the phenomenon of life manifests itself.

. that the separate philosophical ideas are not anything optional or
autonomously evolving but grow up in connection and relationship with
each other that however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear
in the history of thought they nevertheless belong just as much to
a system as the collective members of the fauna of a continent--is
betrayed in the end by the circumstance how unfailingly the most
diverse philosophers always fill in again a definite fundamental scheme
of possible philosophies. under an invisible spell they always revolve
once more in the same orbit however independent of each other they
may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills something
within them leads them something impels them in definite order the
one after the other--to wit the innate methodology and relationship
of their ideas. their thinking is in fact far less a discovery than a
re-recognizing a remembering a return and a home-coming to a far-off
ancient common-household of the soul out of which those ideas formerly
grew philosophizing is so far a kind of atavism of the highest order.
the wonderful family resemblance of all indian greek and german
philosophizing is easily enough explained. in fact where there is
affinity of language owing to the common philosophy of grammar--i mean
owing to the unconscious domination and guidance of similar grammatical
functions--it cannot but be that everything is prepared at the outset
for a similar development and succession of philosophical systems
just as the way seems barred against certain other possibilities of
world-interpretation. it is highly probable that philosophers within the
domain of the ural-altaic languages where the conception of the subject
is least developed look otherwise into the world and will be
found on paths of thought different from those of the indo-germans and
mussulmans the spell of certain grammatical functions is ultimately
also the spell of physiological valuations and racial conditions.--so
much by way of rejecting lockes superficiality with regard to the
origin of ideas.

. the causa sui is the best self-contradiction that has yet been
conceived it is a sort of logical violation and unnaturalness; but the
extravagant pride of man has managed to entangle itself profoundly and
frightfully with this very folly. the desire for freedom of will
in the superlative metaphysical sense such as still holds sway
unfortunately in the minds of the half-educated the desire to bear
the entire and ultimate responsibility for ones actions oneself and
to absolve god the world ancestors chance and society therefrom
involves nothing less than to be precisely this causa sui and with
more than munchausen daring to pull oneself up into existence by the
hair out of the slough of nothingness. if any one should find out in
this manner the crass stupidity of the celebrated conception of free
will and put it out of his head altogether i beg of him to carry
his enlightenment a step further and also put out of his head the
contrary of this monstrous conception of free will i mean non-free
will which is tantamount to a misuse of cause and effect. one
should not wrongly materialise cause and effect as the natural
philosophers do and whoever like them naturalize in thinking at
present according to the prevailing mechanical doltishness which makes
the cause press and push until it effects its end; one should use
cause and effect only as pure conceptions that is to say as
conventional fictions for the purpose of designation and mutual
understanding--not for explanation. in being-in-itself there is
nothing of casual-connection of necessity or of psychological
non-freedom; there the effect does not follow the cause there law
does not obtain. it is we alone who have devised cause sequence
reciprocity relativity constraint number law freedom motive
and purpose; and when we interpret and intermix this symbol-world
as being-in-itself with things we act once more as we have always
acted--mythologically. the non-free will is mythology; in real life
it is only a question of strong and weak wills.--it is almost always
a symptom of what is lacking in himself when a thinker in every
causal-connection and psychological necessity manifests something
of compulsion indigence obsequiousness oppression and non-freedom;
it is suspicious to have such feelings--the person betrays himself. and
in general if i have observed correctly the non-freedom of the will
is regarded as a problem from two entirely opposite standpoints but
always in a profoundly personal manner some will not give up their
responsibility their belief in themselves the personal right to
their merits at any price the vain races belong to this class; others
on the contrary do not wish to be answerable for anything or blamed
for anything and owing to an inward self-contempt seek to get out of
the business no matter how. the latter when they write books are
in the habit at present of taking the side of criminals; a sort of
socialistic sympathy is their favourite disguise. and as a matter of
fact the fatalism of the weak-willed embellishes itself surprisingly
when it can pose as la religion de la souffrance humaine; that is its
good taste.

. let me be pardoned as an old philologist who cannot desist from
the mischief of putting his finger on bad modes of interpretation but
natures conformity to law of which you physicists talk so proudly
as though--why it exists only owing to your interpretation and bad
philology. it is no matter of fact no text but rather just a
naively humanitarian adjustment and perversion of meaning with which
you make abundant concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern
soul! everywhere equality before the law--nature is not different in
that respect nor better than we a fine instance of secret motive
in which the vulgar antagonism to everything privileged and
autocratic--likewise a second and more refined atheism--is once more
disguised. ni dieu ni maitre--that also is what you want; and
therefore cheers for natural law!--is it not so but as has been
said that is interpretation not text; and somebody might come along
who with opposite intentions and modes of interpretation could read
out of the same nature and with regard to the same phenomena just
the tyrannically inconsiderate and relentless enforcement of the claims
of power--an interpreter who should so place the unexceptionalness and
unconditionalness of all will to power before your eyes that almost
every word and the word tyranny itself would eventually seem
unsuitable or like a weakening and softening metaphor--as being too
human; and who should nevertheless end by asserting the same about
this world as you do namely that it has a necessary and calculable
course not however because laws obtain in it but because they are
absolutely lacking and every power effects its ultimate consequences
every moment. granted that this also is only interpretation--and you
will be eager enough to make this objection--well so much the better.

. all psychology hitherto has run aground on moral prejudices and
timidities it has not dared to launch out into the depths. in so far
as it is allowable to recognize in that which has hitherto been written
evidence of that which has hitherto been kept silent it seems as if
nobody had yet harboured the notion of psychology as the morphology
and development-doctrine of the will to power as i conceive of it.
the power of moral prejudices has penetrated deeply into the most
intellectual world the world apparently most indifferent and
unprejudiced and has obviously operated in an injurious obstructive
blinding and distorting manner. a proper physio-psychology has to
contend with unconscious antagonism in the heart of the investigator
it has the heart against it even a doctrine of the reciprocal
conditionalness of the good and the bad impulses causes as
refined immorality distress and aversion in a still strong and manly
conscience--still more so a doctrine of the derivation of all good
impulses from bad ones. if however a person should regard even
the emotions of hatred envy covetousness and imperiousness
as life-conditioning emotions as factors which must be present
fundamentally and essentially in the general economy of life which
must therefore be further developed if life is to be further
developed he will suffer from such a view of things as from
sea-sickness. and yet this hypothesis is far from being the strangest
and most painful in this immense and almost new domain of dangerous
knowledge and there are in fact a hundred good reasons why every one
should keep away from it who can do so! on the other hand if one has
once drifted hither with ones bark well! very good! now let us set our
teeth firmly! let us open our eyes and keep our hand fast on the helm!
we sail away right over morality we crush out we destroy perhaps the
remains of our own morality by daring to make our voyage thither--but
what do we matter. never yet did a profounder world of insight reveal
itself to daring travelers and adventurers and the psychologist who
thus makes a sacrifice--it is not the sacrifizio dell intelletto
on the contrary!--will at least be entitled to demand in return that
psychology shall once more be recognized as the queen of the sciences
for whose service and equipment the other sciences exist. for psychology
is once more the path to the fundamental problems.



chapter ii. the free spirit


. o sancta simplicitiatas! in what strange simplification and
falsification man lives! one can never cease wondering when once one has
got eyes for beholding this marvel! how we have made everything around
us clear and free and easy and simple! how we have been able to give
our senses a passport to everything superficial our thoughts a godlike
desire for wanton pranks and wrong inferences!--how from the beginning
we have contrived to retain our ignorance in order to enjoy an almost
inconceivable freedom thoughtlessness imprudence heartiness
and gaiety--in order to enjoy life! and only on this solidified
granite-like foundation of ignorance could knowledge rear itself
hitherto the will to knowledge on the foundation of a far more powerful
will the will to ignorance to the uncertain to the untrue! not as
its opposite but--as its refinement! it is to be hoped indeed that
language here as elsewhere will not get over its awkwardness and that
it will continue to talk of opposites where there are only degrees
and many refinements of gradation; it is equally to be hoped that the
incarnated tartuffery of morals which now belongs to our unconquerable
flesh and blood will turn the words round in the mouths of us
discerning ones. here and there we understand it and laugh at the way
in which precisely the best knowledge seeks most to retain us in this
simplified thoroughly artificial suitably imagined and suitably
falsified world at the way in which whether it will or not it loves
error because as living itself it loves life!

. after such a cheerful commencement a serious word would fain be
heard; it appeals to the most serious minds. take care ye philosophers
and friends of knowledge and beware of martyrdom! of suffering for the
truths sake! even in your own defense! it spoils all the innocence
and fine neutrality of your conscience; it makes you headstrong against
objections and red rags; it stupefies animalizes and brutalizes when
in the struggle with danger slander suspicion expulsion and even
worse consequences of enmity ye have at last to play your last card
as protectors of truth upon earth--as though the truth were such an
innocent and incompetent creature as to require protectors! and you of
all people ye knights of the sorrowful countenance messrs loafers and
cobweb-spinners of the spirit! finally ye know sufficiently well that
it cannot be of any consequence if ye just carry your point; ye know
that hitherto no philosopher has carried his point and that there might
be a more laudable truthfulness in every little interrogative mark
which you place after your special words and favourite doctrines and
occasionally after yourselves than in all the solemn pantomime and
trumping games before accusers and law-courts! rather go out of the way!
flee into concealment! and have your masks and your ruses that ye may
be mistaken for what you are or somewhat feared! and pray dont forget
the garden the garden with golden trellis-work! and have people around
you who are as a garden--or as music on the waters at eventide when
already the day becomes a memory. choose the good solitude the free
wanton lightsome solitude which also gives you the right still to
remain good in any sense whatsoever! how poisonous how crafty how bad
does every long war make one which cannot be waged openly by means
of force! how personal does a long fear make one a long watching
of enemies of possible enemies! these pariahs of society these
long-pursued badly-persecuted ones--also the compulsory recluses the
spinozas or giordano brunos--always become in the end even under the
most intellectual masquerade and perhaps without being themselves aware
of it refined vengeance-seekers and poison-brewers just lay bare
the foundation of spinozas ethics and theology! not to speak of
the stupidity of moral indignation which is the unfailing sign in a
philosopher that the sense of philosophical humour has left him. the
martyrdom of the philosopher his sacrifice for the sake of truth
forces into the light whatever of the agitator and actor lurks in him;
and if one has hitherto contemplated him only with artistic curiosity
with regard to many a philosopher it is easy to understand the dangerous
desire to see him also in his deterioration deteriorated into a
martyr into a stage-and-tribune-bawler. only that it is necessary
with such a desire to be clear what spectacle one will see in any
case--merely a satyric play merely an epilogue farce merely the
continued proof that the long real tragedy is at an end supposing that
every philosophy has been a long tragedy in its origin.

. every select man strives instinctively for a citadel and a privacy
where he is free from the crowd the many the majority--where he may
forget men who are the rule as their exception;--exclusive only of
the case in which he is pushed straight to such men by a still stronger
instinct as a discerner in the great and exceptional sense. whoever in
intercourse with men does not occasionally glisten in all the green
and grey colours of distress owing to disgust satiety sympathy
gloominess and solitariness is assuredly not a man of elevated tastes;
supposing however that he does not voluntarily take all this burden
and disgust upon himself that he persistently avoids it and remains
as i said quietly and proudly hidden in his citadel one thing is then
certain he was not made he was not predestined for knowledge. for as
such he would one day have to say to himself the devil take my good
taste! but the rule is more interesting than the exception--than
myself the exception! and he would go down and above all he would
go inside. the long and serious study of the average man--and
consequently much disguise self-overcoming familiarity and bad
intercourse all intercourse is bad intercourse except with ones
equals--that constitutes a necessary part of the life-history of every
philosopher; perhaps the most disagreeable odious and disappointing
part. if he is fortunate however as a favourite child of knowledge
should be he will meet with suitable auxiliaries who will shorten and
lighten his task; i mean so-called cynics those who simply recognize
the animal the commonplace and the rule in themselves and at the
same time have so much spirituality and ticklishness as to make them
talk of themselves and their like before witnesses--sometimes they
wallow even in books as on their own dung-hill. cynicism is the only
form in which base souls approach what is called honesty; and the
higher man must open his ears to all the coarser or finer cynicism and
congratulate himself when the clown becomes shameless right before
him or the scientific satyr speaks out. there are even cases where
enchantment mixes with the disgust--namely where by a freak of nature
genius is bound to some such indiscreet billy-goat and ape as in the
case of the abbe galiani the profoundest acutest and perhaps also
filthiest man of his century--he was far profounder than voltaire and
consequently also a good deal more silent. it happens more frequently
as has been hinted that a scientific head is placed on an apes body a
fine exceptional understanding in a base soul an occurrence by no means
rare especially among doctors and moral physiologists. and whenever
anyone speaks without bitterness or rather quite innocently of man
as a belly with two requirements and a head with one; whenever any one
sees seeks and wants to see only hunger sexual instinct and vanity
as the real and only motives of human actions; in short when any one
speaks badly--and not even ill--of man then ought the lover of
knowledge to hearken attentively and diligently; he ought in general
to have an open ear wherever there is talk without indignation. for the
indignant man and he who perpetually tears and lacerates himself with
his own teeth or in place of himself the world god or society
may indeed morally speaking stand higher than the laughing and
self-satisfied satyr but in every other sense he is the more ordinary
more indifferent and less instructive case. and no one is such a liar
as the indignant man.

. it is difficult to be understood especially when one thinks and
lives gangasrotogati footnote like the river ganges presto. among
those only who think and live otherwise--namely kurmagati footnote
like the tortoise lento. or at best froglike mandeikagati
footnote like the frog staccato. i do everything to be difficultly
understood myself!--and one should be heartily grateful for the
good will to some refinement of interpretation. as regards the good
friends however who are always too easy-going and think that as
friends they have a right to ease one does well at the very first to
grant them a play-ground and romping-place for misunderstanding--one can
thus laugh still; or get rid of them altogether these good friends--and
laugh then also!

. what is most difficult to render from one language into another
is the tempo of its style which has its basis in the character of the
race or to speak more physiologically in the average tempo of the
assimilation of its nutriment. there are honestly meant translations
which as involuntary vulgarizations are almost falsifications of the
original merely because its lively and merry tempo which overleaps and
obviates all dangers in word and expression could not also be
rendered. a german is almost incapacitated for presto in his language;
consequently also as may be reasonably inferred for many of the most
delightful and daring nuances of free free-spirited thought. and just
as the buffoon and satyr are foreign to him in body and conscience
so aristophanes and petronius are untranslatable for him. everything
ponderous viscous and pompously clumsy all long-winded and wearying
species of style are developed in profuse variety among germans--pardon
me for stating the fact that even goethes prose in its mixture of
stiffness and elegance is no exception as a reflection of the good
old time to which it belongs and as an expression of german taste at a
time when there was still a german taste which was a rococo-taste
in moribus et artibus. lessing is an exception owing to his histrionic
nature which understood much and was versed in many things; he who was
not the translator of bayle to no purpose who took refuge willingly in
the shadow of diderot and voltaire and still more willingly among the
roman comedy-writers--lessing loved also free-spiritism in the tempo
and flight out of germany. but how could the german language even
in the prose of lessing imitate the tempo of machiavelli who in his
principe makes us breathe the dry fine air of florence and cannot
help presenting the most serious events in a boisterous allegrissimo
perhaps not without a malicious artistic sense of the contrast he
ventures to present--long heavy difficult dangerous thoughts and
a tempo of the gallop and of the best wantonest humour finally who
would venture on a german translation of petronius who more than any
great musician hitherto was a master of presto in invention ideas and
words what matter in the end about the swamps of the sick evil world
or of the ancient world when like him one has the feet of a wind
the rush the breath the emancipating scorn of a wind which makes
everything healthy by making everything run! and with regard to
aristophanes--that transfiguring complementary genius for whose
sake one pardons all hellenism for having existed provided one has
understood in its full profundity all that there requires pardon and
transfiguration; there is nothing that has caused me to meditate more on
platos secrecy and sphinx-like nature than the happily preserved petit
fait that under the pillow of his death-bed there was found no
bible nor anything egyptian pythagorean or platonic--but a book of
aristophanes. how could even plato have endured life--a greek life which
he repudiated--without an aristophanes!

. it is the business of the very few to be independent; it is a
privilege of the strong. and whoever attempts it even with the best
right but without being obliged to do so proves that he is probably
not only strong but also daring beyond measure. he enters into a
labyrinth he multiplies a thousandfold the dangers which life in itself
already brings with it; not the least of which is that no one can see
how and where he loses his way becomes isolated and is torn piecemeal
by some minotaur of conscience. supposing such a one comes to grief it
is so far from the comprehension of men that they neither feel it nor
sympathize with it. and he cannot any longer go back! he cannot even go
back again to the sympathy of men!

. our deepest insights must--and should--appear as follies and under
certain circumstances as crimes when they come unauthorizedly to
the ears of those who are not disposed and predestined for them. the
exoteric and the esoteric as they were formerly distinguished by
philosophers--among the indians as among the greeks persians and
mussulmans in short wherever people believed in gradations of rank and
not in equality and equal rights--are not so much in contradistinction
to one another in respect to the exoteric class standing without and
viewing estimating measuring and judging from the outside and not
from the inside; the more essential distinction is that the class in
question views things from below upwards--while the esoteric class views
things from above downwards. there are heights of the soul from which
tragedy itself no longer appears to operate tragically; and if all the
woe in the world were taken together who would dare to decide whether
the sight of it would necessarily seduce and constrain to sympathy and
thus to a doubling of the woe... that which serves the higher class of
men for nourishment or refreshment must be almost poison to an entirely
different and lower order of human beings. the virtues of the common
man would perhaps mean vice and weakness in a philosopher; it might be
possible for a highly developed man supposing him to degenerate and go
to ruin to acquire qualities thereby alone for the sake of which he
would have to be honoured as a saint in the lower world into which he
had sunk. there are books which have an inverse value for the soul and
the health according as the inferior soul and the lower vitality or the
higher and more powerful make use of them. in the former case they are
dangerous disturbing unsettling books in the latter case they are
herald-calls which summon the bravest to their bravery. books for the
general reader are always ill-smelling books the odour of paltry people
clings to them. where the populace eat and drink and even where they
reverence it is accustomed to stink. one should not go into churches if
one wishes to breathe pure air.

. in our youthful years we still venerate and despise without the art
of nuance which is the best gain of life and we have rightly to do
hard penance for having fallen upon men and things with yea and nay.
everything is so arranged that the worst of all tastes the taste for
the unconditional is cruelly befooled and abused until a man learns
to introduce a little art into his sentiments and prefers to try
conclusions with the artificial as do the real artists of life. the
angry and reverent spirit peculiar to youth appears to allow itself no
peace until it has suitably falsified men and things to be able
to vent its passion upon them youth in itself even is something
falsifying and deceptive. later on when the young soul tortured by
continual disillusions finally turns suspiciously against itself--still
ardent and savage even in its suspicion and remorse of conscience how
it upbraids itself how impatiently it tears itself how it revenges
itself for its long self-blinding as though it had been a voluntary
blindness! in this transition one punishes oneself by distrust of ones
sentiments; one tortures ones enthusiasm with doubt one feels even the
good conscience to be a danger as if it were the self-concealment and
lassitude of a more refined uprightness; and above all one espouses
upon principle the cause against youth.--a decade later and one
comprehends that all this was also still--youth!

. throughout the longest period of human history--one calls it the
prehistoric period--the value or non-value of an action was inferred
from its consequences; the action in itself was not taken into
consideration any more than its origin; but pretty much as in china at
present where the distinction or disgrace of a child redounds to
its parents the retro-operating power of success or failure was what
induced men to think well or ill of an action. let us call this period
the pre-moral period of mankind; the imperative know thyself! was
then still unknown.--in the last ten thousand years on the other hand
on certain large portions of the earth one has gradually got so far
that one no longer lets the consequences of an action but its origin
decide with regard to its worth a great achievement as a whole an
important refinement of vision and of criterion the unconscious effect
of the supremacy of aristocratic values and of the belief in origin
the mark of a period which may be designated in the narrower sense as
the moral one the first attempt at self-knowledge is thereby
made. instead of the consequences the origin--what an inversion
of perspective! and assuredly an inversion effected only after long
struggle and wavering! to be sure an ominous new superstition a
peculiar narrowness of interpretation attained supremacy precisely
thereby the origin of an action was interpreted in the most definite
sense possible as origin out of an intention; people were agreed in the
belief that the value of an action lay in the value of its intention.
the intention as the sole origin and antecedent history of an action
under the influence of this prejudice moral praise and blame have been
bestowed and men have judged and even philosophized almost up to the
present day.--is it not possible however that the necessity may now
have arisen of again making up our minds with regard to the reversing
and fundamental shifting of values owing to a new self-consciousness
and acuteness in man--is it not possible that we may be standing on
the threshold of a period which to begin with would be distinguished
negatively as ultra-moral nowadays when at least among us immoralists
the suspicion arises that the decisive value of an action lies precisely
in that which is not intentional and that all its intentionalness all
that is seen sensible or sensed in it belongs to its surface or
skin--which like every skin betrays something but conceals still
more in short we believe that the intention is only a sign or symptom
which first requires an explanation--a sign moreover which has too
many interpretations and consequently hardly any meaning in itself
alone that morality in the sense in which it has been understood
hitherto as intention-morality has been a prejudice perhaps a
prematureness or preliminariness probably something of the same rank
as astrology and alchemy but in any case something which must be
surmounted. the surmounting of morality in a certain sense even the
self-mounting of morality--let that be the name for the long-secret
labour which has been reserved for the most refined the most upright
and also the most wicked consciences of today as the living touchstones
of the soul.

. it cannot be helped the sentiment of surrender of sacrifice for
ones neighbour and all self-renunciation-morality must be mercilessly
called to account and brought to judgment; just as the aesthetics
of disinterested contemplation under which the emasculation of art
nowadays seeks insidiously enough to create itself a good conscience.
there is far too much witchery and sugar in the sentiments for others
and not for myself for one not needing to be doubly distrustful here
and for one asking promptly are they not perhaps--deceptions--that
they please--him who has them and him who enjoys their fruit and also
the mere spectator--that is still no argument in their favour but just
calls for caution. let us therefore be cautious!

. at whatever standpoint of philosophy one may place oneself nowadays
seen from every position the erroneousness of the world in which we
think we live is the surest and most certain thing our eyes can light
upon we find proof after proof thereof which would fain allure us into
surmises concerning a deceptive principle in the nature of things.
he however who makes thinking itself and consequently the spirit
responsible for the falseness of the world--an honourable exit which
every conscious or unconscious advocatus dei avails himself of--he
who regards this world including space time form and movement as
falsely deduced would have at least good reason in the end to become
distrustful also of all thinking; has it not hitherto been playing upon
us the worst of scurvy tricks and what guarantee would it give that
it would not continue to do what it has always been doing in all
seriousness the innocence of thinkers has something touching and
respect-inspiring in it which even nowadays permits them to wait upon
consciousness with the request that it will give them honest answers
for example whether it be real or not and why it keeps the outer
world so resolutely at a distance and other questions of the same
description. the belief in immediate certainties is a moral naivete
which does honour to us philosophers; but--we have now to cease being
merely moral men! apart from morality such belief is a folly which
does little honour to us! if in middle-class life an ever-ready distrust
is regarded as the sign of a bad character and consequently as an
imprudence here among us beyond the middle-class world and its yeas
and nays what should prevent our being imprudent and saying the
philosopher has at length a right to bad character as the being who
has hitherto been most befooled on earth--he is now under obligation
to distrustfulness to the wickedest squinting out of every abyss of
suspicion.--forgive me the joke of this gloomy grimace and turn of
expression; for i myself have long ago learned to think and estimate
differently with regard to deceiving and being deceived and i keep at
least a couple of pokes in the ribs ready for the blind rage with which
philosophers struggle against being deceived. why not it is nothing
more than a moral prejudice that truth is worth more than semblance; it
is in fact the worst proved supposition in the world. so much must be
conceded there could have been no life at all except upon the basis
of perspective estimates and semblances; and if with the virtuous
enthusiasm and stupidity of many philosophers one wished to do away
altogether with the seeming world--well granted that you could do
that--at least nothing of your truth would thereby remain! indeed
what is it that forces us in general to the supposition that there is an
essential opposition of true and false is it not enough to suppose
degrees of seemingness and as it were lighter and darker shades and
tones of semblance--different valeurs as the painters say why might
not the world which concerns us--be a fiction and to any one who
suggested but to a fiction belongs an originator--might it not be
bluntly replied why may not this belong also belong to the fiction
is it not at length permitted to be a little ironical towards the
subject just as towards the predicate and object might not the
philosopher elevate himself above faith in grammar all respect
to governesses but is it not time that philosophy should renounce
governess-faith

. o voltaire! o humanity! o idiocy! there is something ticklish in
the truth and in the search for the truth; and if man goes about it
too humanely--il ne cherche le vrai que pour faire le bien--i wager he
finds nothing!

. supposing that nothing else is given as real but our world of
desires and passions that we cannot sink or rise to any other reality
but just that of our impulses--for thinking is only a relation of these
impulses to one another--are we not permitted to make the attempt and
to ask the question whether this which is given does not suffice by
means of our counterparts for the understanding even of the so-called
mechanical or material world i do not mean as an illusion a
semblance a representation in the berkeleyan and schopenhauerian
sense but as possessing the same degree of reality as our emotions
themselves--as a more primitive form of the world of emotions in
which everything still lies locked in a mighty unity which afterwards
branches off and develops itself in organic processes naturally also
refines and debilitates--as a kind of instinctive life in which all
organic functions including self-regulation assimilation nutrition
secretion and change of matter are still synthetically united with
one another--as a primary form of life--in the end it is not only
permitted to make this attempt it is commanded by the conscience of
logical method. not to assume several kinds of causality so long as
the attempt to get along with a single one has not been pushed to its
furthest extent to absurdity if i may be allowed to say so that is
a morality of method which one may not repudiate nowadays--it follows
from its definition as mathematicians say. the question is ultimately
whether we really recognize the will as operating whether we believe in
the causality of the will; if we do so--and fundamentally our belief in
this is just our belief in causality itself--we must make the attempt
to posit hypothetically the causality of the will as the only causality.
will can naturally only operate on will--and not on matter not
on nerves for instance in short the hypothesis must be
hazarded whether will does not operate on will wherever effects
are recognized--and whether all mechanical action inasmuch as a power
operates therein is not just the power of will the effect of will.
granted finally that we succeeded in explaining our entire instinctive
life as the development and ramification of one fundamental form of
will--namely the will to power as my thesis puts it; granted that all
organic functions could be traced back to this will to power and that
the solution of the problem of generation and nutrition--it is one
problem--could also be found therein one would thus have acquired the
right to define all active force unequivocally as will to power. the
world seen from within the world defined and designated according to
its intelligible character--it would simply be will to power and
nothing else.

. what does not that mean in popular language god is disproved but
not the devil--on the contrary! on the contrary my friends! and who
the devil also compels you to speak popularly!

. as happened finally in all the enlightenment of modern times with
the french revolution that terrible farce quite superfluous when
judged close at hand into which however the noble and visionary
spectators of all europe have interpreted from a distance their own
indignation and enthusiasm so long and passionately until the text has
disappeared under the interpretation so a noble posterity might once
more misunderstand the whole of the past and perhaps only thereby make
its aspect endurable.--or rather has not this already happened have
not we ourselves been--that noble posterity and in so far as we now
comprehend this is it not--thereby already past

. nobody will very readily regard a doctrine as true merely because
it makes people happy or virtuous--excepting perhaps the amiable
idealists who are enthusiastic about the good true and beautiful
and let all kinds of motley coarse and good-natured desirabilities
swim about promiscuously in their pond. happiness and virtue are no
arguments. it is willingly forgotten however even on the part of
thoughtful minds that to make unhappy and to make bad are just as
little counter-arguments. a thing could be true although it were in
the highest degree injurious and dangerous; indeed the fundamental
constitution of existence might be such that one succumbed by a full
knowledge of it--so that the strength of a mind might be measured by
the amount of truth it could endure--or to speak more plainly by the
extent to which it required truth attenuated veiled sweetened damped
and falsified. but there is no doubt that for the discovery of certain
portions of truth the wicked and unfortunate are more favourably
situated and have a greater likelihood of success; not to speak of the
wicked who are happy--a species about whom moralists are silent. perhaps
severity and craft are more favourable conditions for the development of
strong independent spirits and philosophers than the gentle refined
yielding good-nature and habit of taking things easily which are
prized and rightly prized in a learned man. presupposing always
to begin with that the term philosopher be not confined to the
philosopher who writes books or even introduces his philosophy into
books!--stendhal furnishes a last feature of the portrait of the
free-spirited philosopher which for the sake of german taste i will
not omit to underline--for it is opposed to german taste. pour etre
bon philosophe says this last great psychologist il faut etre sec
clair sans illusion. un banquier qui a fait fortune a une partie du
caractere requis pour faire des decouvertes en philosophie cest-a-dire
pour voir clair dans ce qui est.

. everything that is profound loves the mask the profoundest things
have a hatred even of figure and likeness. should not the contrary only
be the right disguise for the shame of a god to go about in a question
worth asking!--it would be strange if some mystic has not already
ventured on the same kind of thing. there are proceedings of such a
delicate nature that it is well to overwhelm them with coarseness
and make them unrecognizable; there are actions of love and of an
extravagant magnanimity after which nothing can be wiser than to take
a stick and thrash the witness soundly one thereby obscures his
recollection. many a one is able to obscure and abuse his own memory in
order at least to have vengeance on this sole party in the secret
shame is inventive. they are not the worst things of which one is
most ashamed there is not only deceit behind a mask--there is so much
goodness in craft. i could imagine that a man with something costly and
fragile to conceal would roll through life clumsily and rotundly like
an old green heavily-hooped wine-cask the refinement of his shame
requiring it to be so. a man who has depths in his shame meets his
destiny and his delicate decisions upon paths which few ever reach
and with regard to the existence of which his nearest and most intimate
friends may be ignorant; his mortal danger conceals itself from their
eyes and equally so his regained security. such a hidden nature
which instinctively employs speech for silence and concealment and is
inexhaustible in evasion of communication desires and insists that a
mask of himself shall occupy his place in the hearts and heads of his
friends; and supposing he does not desire it his eyes will some day be
opened to the fact that there is nevertheless a mask of him there--and
that it is well to be so. every profound spirit needs a mask; nay more
around every profound spirit there continually grows a mask owing to
the constantly false that is to say superficial interpretation
of every word he utters every step he takes every sign of life he
manifests.

. one must subject oneself to ones own tests that one is destined
for independence and command and do so at the right time. one must not
avoid ones tests although they constitute perhaps the most dangerous
game one can play and are in the end tests made only before ourselves
and before no other judge. not to cleave to any person be it even the
dearest--every person is a prison and also a recess. not to cleave to
a fatherland be it even the most suffering and necessitous--it is even
less difficult to detach ones heart from a victorious fatherland. not
to cleave to a sympathy be it even for higher men into whose peculiar
torture and helplessness chance has given us an insight. not to cleave
to a science though it tempt one with the most valuable discoveries
apparently specially reserved for us. not to cleave to ones own
liberation to the voluptuous distance and remoteness of the bird which
always flies further aloft in order always to see more under it--the
danger of the flier. not to cleave to our own virtues nor become as
a whole a victim to any of our specialties to our hospitality for
instance which is the danger of dangers for highly developed
and wealthy souls who deal prodigally almost indifferently with
themselves and push the virtue of liberality so far that it becomes
a vice. one must know how to conserve oneself--the best test of
independence.

. a new order of philosophers is appearing; i shall venture to baptize
them by a name not without danger. as far as i understand them as far
as they allow themselves to be understood--for it is their nature to
wish to remain something of a puzzle--these philosophers of the
future might rightly perhaps also wrongly claim to be designated as
tempters. this name itself is after all only an attempt or if it be
preferred a temptation.

. will they be new friends of truth these coming philosophers very
probably for all philosophers hitherto have loved their truths. but
assuredly they will not be dogmatists. it must be contrary to their
pride and also contrary to their taste that their truth should still
be truth for every one--that which has hitherto been the secret wish
and ultimate purpose of all dogmatic efforts. my opinion is my opinion
another person has not easily a right to it--such a philosopher of the
future will say perhaps. one must renounce the bad taste of wishing to
agree with many people. good is no longer good when ones neighbour
takes it into his mouth. and how could there be a common good! the
expression contradicts itself; that which can be common is always of
small value. in the end things must be as they are and have always
been--the great things remain for the great the abysses for the
profound the delicacies and thrills for the refined and to sum up
shortly everything rare for the rare.


. need i say expressly after all this that they will be free very
free spirits these philosophers of the future--as certainly also they
will not be merely free spirits but something more higher greater
and fundamentally different which does not wish to be misunderstood and
mistaken but while i say this i feel under obligation almost as much
to them as to ourselves we free spirits who are their heralds and
forerunners to sweep away from ourselves altogether a stupid old
prejudice and misunderstanding which like a fog has too long made the
conception of free spirit obscure. in every country of europe and the
same in america there is at present something which makes an abuse of
this name a very narrow prepossessed enchained class of spirits
who desire almost the opposite of what our intentions and instincts
prompt--not to mention that in respect to the new philosophers who are
appearing they must still more be closed windows and bolted doors.
briefly and regrettably they belong to the levellers these wrongly
named free spirits--as glib-tongued and scribe-fingered slaves of
the democratic taste and its modern ideas all of them men without
solitude without personal solitude blunt honest fellows to whom
neither courage nor honourable conduct ought to be denied only they
are not free and are ludicrously superficial especially in their
innate partiality for seeing the cause of almost all human misery and
failure in the old forms in which society has hitherto existed--a notion
which happily inverts the truth entirely! what they would fain attain
with all their strength is the universal green-meadow happiness of the
herd together with security safety comfort and alleviation of life
for every one their two most frequently chanted songs and doctrines
are called equality of rights and sympathy with all sufferers--and
suffering itself is looked upon by them as something which must be
done away with. we opposite ones however who have opened our eye and
conscience to the question how and where the plant man has hitherto
grown most vigorously believe that this has always taken place under
the opposite conditions that for this end the dangerousness of his
situation had to be increased enormously his inventive faculty and
dissembling power his spirit had to develop into subtlety and daring
under long oppression and compulsion and his will to life had to be
increased to the unconditioned will to power--we believe that severity
violence slavery danger in the street and in the heart secrecy
stoicism tempters art and devilry of every kind--that everything
wicked terrible tyrannical predatory and serpentine in man serves
as well for the elevation of the human species as its opposite--we do
not even say enough when we only say this much and in any case we
find ourselves here both with our speech and our silence at the other
extreme of all modern ideology and gregarious desirability as their
antipodes perhaps what wonder that we free spirits are not exactly
the most communicative spirits that we do not wish to betray in every
respect what a spirit can free itself from and where perhaps it will
then be driven and as to the import of the dangerous formula beyond
good and evil with which we at least avoid confusion we are something
else than libres-penseurs liben pensatori free-thinkers
and whatever these honest advocates of modern ideas like to call
themselves. having been at home or at least guests in many realms of
the spirit having escaped again and again from the gloomy agreeable
nooks in which preferences and prejudices youth origin the accident
of men and books or even the weariness of travel seemed to confine us
full of malice against the seductions of dependency which he concealed
in honours money positions or exaltation of the senses grateful even
for distress and the vicissitudes of illness because they always free
us from some rule and its prejudice grateful to the god devil
sheep and worm in us inquisitive to a fault investigators to the
point of cruelty with unhesitating fingers for the intangible with
teeth and stomachs for the most indigestible ready for any business
that requires sagacity and acute senses ready for every adventure
owing to an excess of free will with anterior and posterior souls
into the ultimate intentions of which it is difficult to pry with
foregrounds and backgrounds to the end of which no foot may run hidden
ones under the mantles of light appropriators although we resemble
heirs and spendthrifts arrangers and collectors from morning till
night misers of our wealth and our full-crammed drawers economical
in learning and forgetting inventive in scheming sometimes proud of
tables of categories sometimes pedants sometimes night-owls of
work even in full day yea if necessary even scarecrows--and it is
necessary nowadays that is to say inasmuch as we are the born sworn
jealous friends of solitude of our own profoundest midnight and midday
solitude--such kind of men are we we free spirits! and perhaps ye are
also something of the same kind ye coming ones ye new philosophers



chapter iii. the religious mood


. the human soul and its limits the range of mans inner experiences
hitherto attained the heights depths and distances of these
experiences the entire history of the soul up to the present time
and its still unexhausted possibilities this is the preordained
hunting-domain for a born psychologist and lover of a big hunt. but
how often must he say despairingly to himself a single individual!
alas only a single individual! and this great forest this virgin
forest! so he would like to have some hundreds of hunting assistants
and fine trained hounds that he could send into the history of the
human soul to drive his game together. in vain again and again he
experiences profoundly and bitterly how difficult it is to find
assistants and dogs for all the things that directly excite his
curiosity. the evil of sending scholars into new and dangerous
hunting-domains where courage sagacity and subtlety in every sense
are required is that they are no longer serviceable just when the big
hunt and also the great danger commences--it is precisely then that
they lose their keen eye and nose. in order for instance to divine and
determine what sort of history the problem of knowledge and conscience
has hitherto had in the souls of homines religiosi a person would
perhaps himself have to possess as profound as bruised as immense an
experience as the intellectual conscience of pascal; and then he would
still require that wide-spread heaven of clear wicked spirituality
which from above would be able to oversee arrange and effectively
formulize this mass of dangerous and painful experiences.--but who
could do me this service! and who would have time to wait for such
servants!--they evidently appear too rarely they are so improbable at
all times! eventually one must do everything oneself in order to know
something; which means that one has much to do!--but a curiosity like
mine is once for all the most agreeable of vices--pardon me! i mean to
say that the love of truth has its reward in heaven and already upon
earth.

. faith such as early christianity desired and not infrequently
achieved in the midst of a skeptical and southernly free-spirited world
which had centuries of struggle between philosophical schools behind
it and in it counting besides the education in tolerance which
the imperium romanum gave--this faith is not that sincere austere
slave-faith by which perhaps a luther or a cromwell or some other
northern barbarian of the spirit remained attached to his god and
christianity it is much rather the faith of pascal which resembles in
a terrible manner a continuous suicide of reason--a tough long-lived
worm-like reason which is not to be slain at once and with a single
blow. the christian faith from the beginning is sacrifice the sacrifice
of all freedom all pride all self-confidence of spirit it is at
the same time subjection self-derision and self-mutilation. there is
cruelty and religious phoenicianism in this faith which is adapted to a
tender many-sided and very fastidious conscience it takes for granted
that the subjection of the spirit is indescribably painful that all the
past and all the habits of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum in
the form of which faith comes to it. modern men with their obtuseness
as regards all christian nomenclature have no longer the sense for the
terribly superlative conception which was implied to an antique taste by
the paradox of the formula god on the cross. hitherto there had never
and nowhere been such boldness in inversion nor anything at once so
dreadful questioning and questionable as this formula it promised a
transvaluation of all ancient values--it was the orient the profound
orient it was the oriental slave who thus took revenge on rome and its
noble light-minded toleration on the roman catholicism of non-faith
and it was always not the faith but the freedom from the faith the
half-stoical and smiling indifference to the seriousness of the faith
which made the slaves indignant at their masters and revolt against
them. enlightenment causes revolt for the slave desires the
unconditioned he understands nothing but the tyrannous even in morals
he loves as he hates without nuance to the very depths to the point
of pain to the point of sickness--his many hidden sufferings make
him revolt against the noble taste which seems to deny suffering. the
skepticism with regard to suffering fundamentally only an attitude of
aristocratic morality was not the least of the causes also of the
last great slave-insurrection which began with the french revolution.

. wherever the religious neurosis has appeared on the earth so far
we find it connected with three dangerous prescriptions as to regimen
solitude fasting and sexual abstinence--but without its being possible
to determine with certainty which is cause and which is effect or if
any relation at all of cause and effect exists there. this latter doubt
is justified by the fact that one of the most regular symptoms among
savage as well as among civilized peoples is the most sudden and
excessive sensuality which then with equal suddenness transforms into
penitential paroxysms world-renunciation and will-renunciation both
symptoms perhaps explainable as disguised epilepsy but nowhere is it
more obligatory to put aside explanations around no other type has there
grown such a mass of absurdity and superstition no other type seems to
have been more interesting to men and even to philosophers--perhaps it
is time to become just a little indifferent here to learn caution or
better still to look away to go away--yet in the background of the
most recent philosophy that of schopenhauer we find almost as the
problem in itself this terrible note of interrogation of the religious
crisis and awakening. how is the negation of will possible how is the
saint possible--that seems to have been the very question with which
schopenhauer made a start and became a philosopher. and thus it was a
genuine schopenhauerian consequence that his most convinced adherent
perhaps also his last as far as germany is concerned namely richard
wagner should bring his own life-work to an end just here and should
finally put that terrible and eternal type upon the stage as kundry
type vecu and as it loved and lived at the very time that the
mad-doctors in almost all european countries had an opportunity to study
the type close at hand wherever the religious neurosis--or as i call
it the religious mood--made its latest epidemical outbreak and
display as the salvation army--if it be a question however as to
what has been so extremely interesting to men of all sorts in all ages
and even to philosophers in the whole phenomenon of the saint it
is undoubtedly the appearance of the miraculous therein--namely the
immediate succession of opposites of states of the soul regarded as
morally antithetical it was believed here to be self-evident that
a bad man was all at once turned into a saint a good man. the
hitherto existing psychology was wrecked at this point is it not
possible it may have happened principally because psychology had placed
itself under the dominion of morals because it believed in oppositions
of moral values and saw read and interpreted these oppositions
into the text and facts of the case what miracle only an error of
interpretation a lack of philology

. it seems that the latin races are far more deeply attached to their
catholicism than we northerners are to christianity generally and
that consequently unbelief in catholic countries means something quite
different from what it does among protestants--namely a sort of revolt
against the spirit of the race while with us it is rather a return to
the spirit or non-spirit of the race.

we northerners undoubtedly derive our origin from barbarous races even
as regards our talents for religion--we have poor talents for it. one
may make an exception in the case of the celts who have theretofore
furnished also the best soil for christian infection in the north the
christian ideal blossomed forth in france as much as ever the pale sun
of the north would allow it. how strangely pious for our taste are still
these later french skeptics whenever there is any celtic blood in their
origin! how catholic how un-german does auguste comtes sociology
seem to us with the roman logic of its instincts! how jesuitical that
amiable and shrewd cicerone of port royal sainte-beuve in spite of all
his hostility to jesuits! and even ernest renan how inaccessible to
us northerners does the language of such a renan appear in whom
every instant the merest touch of religious thrill throws his refined
voluptuous and comfortably couching soul off its balance! let us repeat
after him these fine sentences--and what wickedness and haughtiness is
immediately aroused by way of answer in our probably less beautiful but
harder souls that is to say in our more german souls!--disons donc
hardiment que la religion est un produit de lhomme normal que lhomme
est le plus dans le vrai quant il est le plus religieux et le plus
assure dune destinee infinie.... cest quand il est bon quil veut que
la virtu corresponde a un order eternal cest quand il contemple les
choses dune maniere desinteressee quil trouve la mort revoltante et
absurde. comment ne pas supposer que cest dans ces moments-la que
lhomme voit le mieux... these sentences are so extremely antipodal
to my ears and habits of thought that in my first impulse of rage
on finding them i wrote on the margin la niaiserie religieuse par
excellence!--until in my later rage i even took a fancy to them these
sentences with their truth absolutely inverted! it is so nice and such a
distinction to have ones own antipodes!

. that which is so astonishing in the religious life of the ancient
greeks is the irrestrainable stream of gratitude which it pours
forth--it is a very superior kind of man who takes such an attitude
towards nature and life.--later on when the populace got the upper hand
in greece fear became rampant also in religion; and christianity was
preparing itself.

. the passion for god there are churlish honest-hearted and
importunate kinds of it like that of luther--the whole of protestantism
lacks the southern delicatezza. there is an oriental exaltation of the
mind in it like that of an undeservedly favoured or elevated slave as
in the case of st. augustine for instance who lacks in an offensive
manner all nobility in bearing and desires. there is a feminine
tenderness and sensuality in it which modestly and unconsciously longs
for a unio mystica et physica as in the case of madame de guyon. in
many cases it appears curiously enough as the disguise of a girls
or youths puberty; here and there even as the hysteria of an old maid
also as her last ambition. the church has frequently canonized the woman
in such a case.

. the mightiest men have hitherto always bowed reverently before
the saint as the enigma of self-subjugation and utter voluntary
privation--why did they thus bow they divined in him--and as it were
behind the questionableness of his frail and wretched appearance--the
superior force which wished to test itself by such a subjugation; the
strength of will in which they recognized their own strength and
love of power and knew how to honour it they honoured something
in themselves when they honoured the saint. in addition to this the
contemplation of the saint suggested to them a suspicion such an
enormity of self-negation and anti-naturalness will not have been
coveted for nothing--they have said inquiringly. there is perhaps a
reason for it some very great danger about which the ascetic might
wish to be more accurately informed through his secret interlocutors and
visitors in a word the mighty ones of the world learned to have a new
fear before him they divined a new power a strange still unconquered
enemy--it was the will to power which obliged them to halt before the
saint. they had to question him.

. in the jewish old testament the book of divine justice there are
men things and sayings on such an immense scale that greek and indian
literature has nothing to compare with it. one stands with fear and
reverence before those stupendous remains of what man was formerly and
one has sad thoughts about old asia and its little out-pushed peninsula
europe which would like by all means to figure before asia as the
progress of mankind. to be sure he who is himself only a slender
tame house-animal and knows only the wants of a house-animal like
our cultured people of today including the christians of cultured
christianity need neither be amazed nor even sad amid those ruins--the
taste for the old testament is a touchstone with respect to great and
small perhaps he will find that the new testament the book of grace
still appeals more to his heart there is much of the odour of the
genuine tender stupid beadsman and petty soul in it. to have bound
up this new testament a kind of rococo of taste in every respect along
with the old testament into one book as the bible as the book in
itself is perhaps the greatest audacity and sin against the spirit
which literary europe has upon its conscience.

. why atheism nowadays the father in god is thoroughly refuted;
equally so the judge the rewarder. also his free will he does
not hear--and even if he did he would not know how to help. the worst
is that he seems incapable of communicating himself clearly; is he
uncertain--this is what i have made out by questioning and listening
at a variety of conversations to be the cause of the decline of
european theism; it appears to me that though the religious instinct is
in vigorous growth--it rejects the theistic satisfaction with profound
distrust.

. what does all modern philosophy mainly do since descartes--and
indeed more in defiance of him than on the basis of his procedure--an
attentat has been made on the part of all philosophers on the old
conception of the soul under the guise of a criticism of the subject
and predicate conception--that is to say an attentat on the
fundamental presupposition of christian doctrine. modern philosophy
as epistemological skepticism is secretly or openly anti-christian
although for keener ears be it said by no means anti-religious.
formerly in effect one believed in the soul as one believed in
grammar and the grammatical subject one said i is the condition
think is the predicate and is conditioned--to think is an activity for
which one must suppose a subject as cause. the attempt was then made
with marvelous tenacity and subtlety to see if one could not get out
of this net--to see if the opposite was not perhaps true think the
condition and i the conditioned; i therefore only a synthesis
which has been made by thinking itself. kant really wished to prove
that starting from the subject the subject could not be proved--nor
the object either the possibility of an apparent existence of the
subject and therefore of the soul may not always have been strange
to him--the thought which once had an immense power on earth as the
vedanta philosophy.

. there is a great ladder of religious cruelty with many rounds; but
three of these are the most important. once on a time men sacrificed
human beings to their god and perhaps just those they loved the
best--to this category belong the firstling sacrifices of all primitive
religions and also the sacrifice of the emperor tiberius in the
mithra-grotto on the island of capri that most terrible of all roman
anachronisms. then during the moral epoch of mankind they sacrificed
to their god the strongest instincts they possessed their nature;
this festal joy shines in the cruel glances of ascetics and
anti-natural fanatics. finally what still remained to be sacrificed
was it not necessary in the end for men to sacrifice everything
comforting holy healing all hope all faith in hidden harmonies in
future blessedness and justice was it not necessary to sacrifice god
himself and out of cruelty to themselves to worship stone stupidity
gravity fate nothingness to sacrifice god for nothingness--this
paradoxical mystery of the ultimate cruelty has been reserved for the
rising generation; we all know something thereof already.

. whoever like myself prompted by some enigmatical desire has long
endeavoured to go to the bottom of the question of pessimism and free it
from the half-christian half-german narrowness and stupidity in which
it has finally presented itself to this century namely in the form of
schopenhauers philosophy; whoever with an asiatic and super-asiatic
eye has actually looked inside and into the most world-renouncing of
all possible modes of thought--beyond good and evil and no longer
like buddha and schopenhauer under the dominion and delusion of
morality--whoever has done this has perhaps just thereby without
really desiring it opened his eyes to behold the opposite ideal the
ideal of the most world-approving exuberant and vivacious man who has
not only learnt to compromise and arrange with that which was and
is but wishes to have it again as it was and is for all eternity
insatiably calling out da capo not only to himself but to the whole
piece and play; and not only the play but actually to him who requires
the play--and makes it necessary; because he always requires
himself anew--and makes himself necessary.--what and this would not
be--circulus vitiosus deus

. the distance and as it were the space around man grows with the
strength of his intellectual vision and insight his world becomes
profounder; new stars new enigmas and notions are ever coming into
view. perhaps everything on which the intellectual eye has exercised
its acuteness and profundity has just been an occasion for its exercise
something of a game something for children and childish minds. perhaps
the most solemn conceptions that have caused the most fighting and
suffering the conceptions god and sin will one day seem to us of
no more importance than a childs plaything or a childs pain seems to
an old man;--and perhaps another plaything and another pain will then
be necessary once more for the old man--always childish enough an
eternal child!

. has it been observed to what extent outward idleness or
semi-idleness is necessary to a real religious life alike for its
favourite microscopic labour of self-examination and for its soft
placidity called prayer the state of perpetual readiness for the
coming of god i mean the idleness with a good conscience the
idleness of olden times and of blood to which the aristocratic
sentiment that work is dishonouring--that it vulgarizes body and
soul--is not quite unfamiliar and that consequently the modern noisy
time-engrossing conceited foolishly proud laboriousness educates
and prepares for unbelief more than anything else among these for
instance who are at present living apart from religion in germany i
find free-thinkers of diversified species and origin but above all
a majority of those in whom laboriousness from generation to generation
has dissolved the religious instincts; so that they no longer know what
purpose religions serve and only note their existence in the world
with a kind of dull astonishment. they feel themselves already fully
occupied these good people be it by their business or by their
pleasures not to mention the fatherland and the newspapers and
their family duties; it seems that they have no time whatever left
for religion; and above all it is not obvious to them whether it is a
question of a new business or a new pleasure--for it is impossible they
say to themselves that people should go to church merely to spoil
their tempers. they are by no means enemies of religious customs;
should certain circumstances state affairs perhaps require their
participation in such customs they do what is required as so many
things are done--with a patient and unassuming seriousness and without
much curiosity or discomfort;--they live too much apart and outside
to feel even the necessity for a for or against in such matters. among
those indifferent persons may be reckoned nowadays the majority of
german protestants of the middle classes especially in the great
laborious centres of trade and commerce; also the majority of laborious
scholars and the entire university personnel with the exception of
the theologians whose existence and possibility there always gives
psychologists new and more subtle puzzles to solve. on the part of
pious or merely church-going people there is seldom any idea of how
much good-will one might say arbitrary will is now necessary for a
german scholar to take the problem of religion seriously; his whole
profession and as i have said his whole workmanlike laboriousness to
which he is compelled by his modern conscience inclines him to a
lofty and almost charitable serenity as regards religion with which is
occasionally mingled a slight disdain for the uncleanliness of spirit
which he takes for granted wherever any one still professes to belong
to the church. it is only with the help of history not through his own
personal experience therefore that the scholar succeeds in bringing
himself to a respectful seriousness and to a certain timid deference
in presence of religions; but even when his sentiments have reached the
stage of gratitude towards them he has not personally advanced one
step nearer to that which still maintains itself as church or as piety;
perhaps even the contrary. the practical indifference to religious
matters in the midst of which he has been born and brought up usually
sublimates itself in his case into circumspection and cleanliness which
shuns contact with religious men and things; and it may be just the
depth of his tolerance and humanity which prompts him to avoid the
delicate trouble which tolerance itself brings with it.--every age has
its own divine type of naivete for the discovery of which other ages
may envy it and how much naivete--adorable childlike and boundlessly
foolish naivete is involved in this belief of the scholar in
his superiority in the good conscience of his tolerance in the
unsuspecting simple certainty with which his instinct treats the
religious man as a lower and less valuable type beyond before and
above which he himself has developed--he the little arrogant dwarf
and mob-man the sedulously alert head-and-hand drudge of ideas of
modern ideas!

. whoever has seen deeply into the world has doubtless divined what
wisdom there is in the fact that men are superficial. it is their
preservative instinct which teaches them to be flighty lightsome and
false. here and there one finds a passionate and exaggerated adoration
of pure forms in philosophers as well as in artists it is not to be
doubted that whoever has need of the cult of the superficial to that
extent has at one time or another made an unlucky dive beneath it.
perhaps there is even an order of rank with respect to those burnt
children the born artists who find the enjoyment of life only in trying
to falsify its image as if taking wearisome revenge on it one might
guess to what degree life has disgusted them by the extent to which
they wish to see its image falsified attenuated ultrified and
deified--one might reckon the homines religiosi among the artists as
their highest rank. it is the profound suspicious fear of an incurable
pessimism which compels whole centuries to fasten their teeth into a
religious interpretation of existence the fear of the instinct which
divines that truth might be attained too soon before man has become
strong enough hard enough artist enough.... piety the life in god
regarded in this light would appear as the most elaborate and
ultimate product of the fear of truth as artist-adoration
and artist-intoxication in presence of the most logical of all
falsifications as the will to the inversion of truth to untruth at
any price. perhaps there has hitherto been no more effective means of
beautifying man than piety by means of it man can become so artful so
superficial so iridescent and so good that his appearance no longer
offends.

. to love mankind for gods sake--this has so far been the noblest and
remotest sentiment to which mankind has attained. that love to mankind
without any redeeming intention in the background is only an additional
folly and brutishness that the inclination to this love has first to
get its proportion its delicacy its gram of salt and sprinkling
of ambergris from a higher inclination--whoever first perceived
and experienced this however his tongue may have stammered as it
attempted to express such a delicate matter let him for all time be
holy and respected as the man who has so far flown highest and gone
astray in the finest fashion!

. the philosopher as we free spirits understand him--as the man of
the greatest responsibility who has the conscience for the general
development of mankind--will use religion for his disciplining and
educating work just as he will use the contemporary political
and economic conditions. the selecting and disciplining
influence--destructive as well as creative and fashioning--which can be
exercised by means of religion is manifold and varied according to the
sort of people placed under its spell and protection. for those who are
strong and independent destined and trained to command in whom the
judgment and skill of a ruling race is incorporated religion is
an additional means for overcoming resistance in the exercise of
authority--as a bond which binds rulers and subjects in common
betraying and surrendering to the former the conscience of the latter
their inmost heart which would fain escape obedience. and in the
case of the unique natures of noble origin if by virtue of superior
spirituality they should incline to a more retired and contemplative
life reserving to themselves only the more refined forms of government
over chosen disciples or members of an order religion itself may
be used as a means for obtaining peace from the noise and trouble of
managing grosser affairs and for securing immunity from the unavoidable
filth of all political agitation. the brahmins for instance understood
this fact. with the help of a religious organization they secured to
themselves the power of nominating kings for the people while their
sentiments prompted them to keep apart and outside as men with a higher
and super-regal mission. at the same time religion gives inducement and
opportunity to some of the subjects to qualify themselves for future
ruling and commanding the slowly ascending ranks and classes in which
through fortunate marriage customs volitional power and delight in
self-control are on the increase. to them religion offers sufficient
incentives and temptations to aspire to higher intellectuality and to
experience the sentiments of authoritative self-control of silence and
of solitude. asceticism and puritanism are almost indispensable means of
educating and ennobling a race which seeks to rise above its hereditary
baseness and work itself upwards to future supremacy. and finally to
ordinary men to the majority of the people who exist for service and
general utility and are only so far entitled to exist religion gives
invaluable contentedness with their lot and condition peace of heart
ennoblement of obedience additional social happiness and sympathy
with something of transfiguration and embellishment something of
justification of all the commonplaceness all the meanness all
the semi-animal poverty of their souls. religion together with the
religious significance of life sheds sunshine over such perpetually
harassed men and makes even their own aspect endurable to them it
operates upon them as the epicurean philosophy usually operates upon
sufferers of a higher order in a refreshing and refining manner
almost turning suffering to account and in the end even hallowing and
vindicating it. there is perhaps nothing so admirable in christianity
and buddhism as their art of teaching even the lowest to elevate
themselves by piety to a seemingly higher order of things and thereby
to retain their satisfaction with the actual world in which they find it
difficult enough to live--this very difficulty being necessary.

. to be sure--to make also the bad counter-reckoning against such
religions and to bring to light their secret dangers--the cost is
always excessive and terrible when religions do not operate as an
educational and disciplinary medium in the hands of the philosopher but
rule voluntarily and paramountly when they wish to be the final end
and not a means along with other means. among men as among all other
animals there is a surplus of defective diseased degenerating
infirm and necessarily suffering individuals; the successful cases
among men also are always the exception; and in view of the fact that
man is the animal not yet properly adapted to his environment the rare
exception. but worse still. the higher the type a man represents the
greater is the improbability that he will succeed; the accidental the
law of irrationality in the general constitution of mankind manifests
itself most terribly in its destructive effect on the higher orders of
men the conditions of whose lives are delicate diverse and difficult
to determine. what then is the attitude of the two greatest religions
above-mentioned to the surplus of failures in life they endeavour
to preserve and keep alive whatever can be preserved; in fact as the
religions for sufferers they take the part of these upon principle;
they are always in favour of those who suffer from life as from a
disease and they would fain treat every other experience of life as
false and impossible. however highly we may esteem this indulgent and
preservative care inasmuch as in applying to others it has applied
and applies also to the highest and usually the most suffering type of
man the hitherto paramount religions--to give a general appreciation
of them--are among the principal causes which have kept the type of
man upon a lower level--they have preserved too much that which should
have perished. one has to thank them for invaluable services; and who is
sufficiently rich in gratitude not to feel poor at the contemplation
of all that the spiritual men of christianity have done for europe
hitherto! but when they had given comfort to the sufferers courage to
the oppressed and despairing a staff and support to the helpless
and when they had allured from society into convents and spiritual
penitentiaries the broken-hearted and distracted what else had they
to do in order to work systematically in that fashion and with a good
conscience for the preservation of all the sick and suffering which
means in deed and in truth to work for the deterioration of the
european race to reverse all estimates of value--that is what they
had to do! and to shatter the strong to spoil great hopes to cast
suspicion on the delight in beauty to break down everything autonomous
manly conquering and imperious--all instincts which are natural to the
highest and most successful type of man--into uncertainty distress
of conscience and self-destruction; forsooth to invert all love of the
earthly and of supremacy over the earth into hatred of the earth and
earthly things--that is the task the church imposed on itself and
was obliged to impose until according to its standard of value
unworldliness unsensuousness and higher man fused into one
sentiment. if one could observe the strangely painful equally coarse
and refined comedy of european christianity with the derisive and
impartial eye of an epicurean god i should think one would never cease
marvelling and laughing; does it not actually seem that some single will
has ruled over europe for eighteen centuries in order to make a sublime
abortion of man he however who with opposite requirements no longer
epicurean and with some divine hammer in his hand could approach this
almost voluntary degeneration and stunting of mankind as exemplified in
the european christian pascal for instance would he not have to
cry aloud with rage pity and horror oh you bunglers presumptuous
pitiful bunglers what have you done! was that a work for your hands
how you have hacked and botched my finest stone! what have you presumed
to do!--i should say that christianity has hitherto been the most
portentous of presumptions. men not great enough nor hard enough
to be entitled as artists to take part in fashioning man; men
not sufficiently strong and far-sighted to allow with sublime
self-constraint the obvious law of the thousandfold failures and
perishings to prevail; men not sufficiently noble to see the radically
different grades of rank and intervals of rank that separate man from
man--such men with their equality before god have hitherto swayed
the destiny of europe; until at last a dwarfed almost ludicrous species
has been produced a gregarious animal something obliging sickly
mediocre the european of the present day.



chapter iv. apophthegms and interludes


. he who is a thorough teacher takes things seriously--and even
himself--only in relation to his pupils.

. knowledge for its own sake--that is the last snare laid by
morality we are thereby completely entangled in morals once more.

. the charm of knowledge would be small were it not so much shame has
to be overcome on the way to it.

a. we are most dishonourable towards our god he is not permitted to
sin.

. the tendency of a person to allow himself to be degraded robbed
deceived and exploited might be the diffidence of a god among men.

. love to one only is a barbarity for it is exercised at the expense
of all others. love to god also!

. i did that says my memory. i could not have done that says my
pride and remains inexorable. eventually--the memory yields.

. one has regarded life carelessly if one has failed to see the hand
that--kills with leniency.

. if a man has character he has also his typical experience which
always recurs.

. the sage as astronomer.--so long as thou feelest the stars as an
above thee thou lackest the eye of the discerning one.

. it is not the strength but the duration of great sentiments that
makes great men.

. he who attains his ideal precisely thereby surpasses it.

a. many a peacock hides his tail from every eye--and calls it his
pride.

. a man of genius is unbearable unless he possess at least two things
besides gratitude and purity.

. the degree and nature of a mans sensuality extends to the highest
altitudes of his spirit.

. under peaceful conditions the militant man attacks himself.

. with his principles a man seeks either to dominate or justify
or honour or reproach or conceal his habits two men with the same
principles probably seek fundamentally different ends therewith.

. he who despises himself nevertheless esteems himself thereby as a
despiser.

. a soul which knows that it is loved but does not itself love
betrays its sediment its dregs come up.

. a thing that is explained ceases to concern us--what did the god
mean who gave the advice know thyself! did it perhaps imply cease to
be concerned about thyself! become objective!--and socrates--and the
scientific man

. it is terrible to die of thirst at sea. is it necessary that you
should so salt your truth that it will no longer--quench thirst

. sympathy for all--would be harshness and tyranny for thee my good
neighbour.

. instinct--when the house is on fire one forgets even the
dinner--yes but one recovers it from among the ashes.

. woman learns how to hate in proportion as she--forgets how to charm.

. the same emotions are in man and woman but in different tempo on
that account man and woman never cease to misunderstand each other.

. in the background of all their personal vanity women themselves
have still their impersonal scorn--for woman.

. fettered heart free spirit--when one firmly fetters ones heart
and keeps it prisoner one can allow ones spirit many liberties i said
this once before but people do not believe it when i say so unless they
know it already.

. one begins to distrust very clever persons when they become
embarrassed.

. dreadful experiences raise the question whether he who experiences
them is not something dreadful also.

. heavy melancholy men turn lighter and come temporarily to their
surface precisely by that which makes others heavy--by hatred and love.

. so cold so icy that one burns ones finger at the touch of him!
every hand that lays hold of him shrinks back!--and for that very reason
many think him red-hot.

. who has not at one time or another--sacrificed himself for the sake
of his good name

. in affability there is no hatred of men but precisely on that
account a great deal too much contempt of men.

. the maturity of man--that means to have reacquired the seriousness
that one had as a child at play.

. to be ashamed of ones immorality is a step on the ladder at the end
of which one is ashamed also of ones morality.

. one should part from life as ulysses parted from nausicaa--blessing
it rather than in love with it.

. what a great man i always see merely the play-actor of his own
ideal.

. when one trains ones conscience it kisses one while it bites.

. the disappointed one speaks--i listened for the echo and i heard
only praise.

. we all feign to ourselves that we are simpler than we are we thus
relax ourselves away from our fellows.

. a discerning one might easily regard himself at present as the
animalization of god.

. discovering reciprocal love should really disenchant the lover with
regard to the beloved. what! she is modest enough to love even you or
stupid enough or--or---

. the danger in happiness.--everything now turns out best for me i
now love every fate--who would like to be my fate

. not their love of humanity but the impotence of their love
prevents the christians of today--burning us.

. the pia fraus is still more repugnant to the taste the piety
of the free spirit the pious man of knowledge than the impia fraus.
hence the profound lack of judgment in comparison with the church
characteristic of the type free spirit--as its non-freedom.

. by means of music the very passions enjoy themselves.

. a sign of strong character when once the resolution has been
taken to shut the ear even to the best counter-arguments. occasionally
therefore a will to stupidity.

. there is no such thing as moral phenomena but only a moral
interpretation of phenomena.

. the criminal is often enough not equal to his deed he extenuates
and maligns it.

. the advocates of a criminal are seldom artists enough to turn the
beautiful terribleness of the deed to the advantage of the doer.

. our vanity is most difficult to wound just when our pride has been
wounded.

. to him who feels himself preordained to contemplation and not to
belief all believers are too noisy and obtrusive; he guards against
them.

. you want to prepossess him in your favour then you must be
embarrassed before him.

. the immense expectation with regard to sexual love and the coyness
in this expectation spoils all the perspectives of women at the outset.

. where there is neither love nor hatred in the game womans play is
mediocre.

. the great epochs of our life are at the points when we gain courage
to rebaptize our badness as the best in us.

. the will to overcome an emotion is ultimately only the will of
another or of several other emotions.

. there is an innocence of admiration it is possessed by him to whom
it has not yet occurred that he himself may be admired some day.

. our loathing of dirt may be so great as to prevent our cleaning
ourselves--justifying ourselves.

. sensuality often forces the growth of love too much so that its
root remains weak and is easily torn up.

. it is a curious thing that god learned greek when he wished to turn
author--and that he did not learn it better.

. to rejoice on account of praise is in many cases merely politeness
of heart--and the very opposite of vanity of spirit.

. even concubinage has been corrupted--by marriage.

. he who exults at the stake does not triumph over pain but because
of the fact that he does not feel pain where he expected it. a parable.

. when we have to change an opinion about any one we charge heavily
to his account the inconvenience he thereby causes us.

. a nation is a detour of nature to arrive at six or seven great
men.--yes and then to get round them.

. in the eyes of all true women science is hostile to the sense of
shame. they feel as if one wished to peep under their skin with it--or
worse still! under their dress and finery.

. the more abstract the truth you wish to teach the more must you
allure the senses to it.

. the devil has the most extensive perspectives for god; on that
account he keeps so far away from him--the devil in effect as the
oldest friend of knowledge.

. what a person is begins to betray itself when his talent
decreases--when he ceases to show what he can do. talent is also an
adornment; an adornment is also a concealment.

. the sexes deceive themselves about each other the reason is that
in reality they honour and love only themselves or their own ideal to
express it more agreeably. thus man wishes woman to be peaceable but
in fact woman is essentially unpeaceable like the cat however well she
may have assumed the peaceable demeanour.

. one is punished best for ones virtues.

. he who cannot find the way to his ideal lives more frivolously and
shamelessly than the man without an ideal.

. from the senses originate all trustworthiness all good conscience
all evidence of truth.

. pharisaism is not a deterioration of the good man; a considerable
part of it is rather an essential condition of being good.

. the one seeks an accoucheur for his thoughts the other seeks some
one whom he can assist a good conversation thus originates.

. in intercourse with scholars and artists one readily makes mistakes
of opposite kinds in a remarkable scholar one not infrequently finds
a mediocre man; and often even in a mediocre artist one finds a very
remarkable man.

. we do the same when awake as when dreaming we only invent and
imagine him with whom we have intercourse--and forget it immediately.

. in revenge and in love woman is more barbarous than man.

. advice as a riddle.--if the band is not to break bite it
first--secure to make!

. the belly is the reason why man does not so readily take himself
for a god.

. the chastest utterance i ever heard dans le veritable amour cest
lame qui enveloppe le corps.

. our vanity would like what we do best to pass precisely for what is
most difficult to us.--concerning the origin of many systems of morals.

. when a woman has scholarly inclinations there is generally
something wrong with her sexual nature. barrenness itself conduces to a
certain virility of taste; man indeed if i may say so is the barren
animal.

. comparing man and woman generally one may say that woman would
not have the genius for adornment if she had not the instinct for the
secondary role.

. he who fights with monsters should be careful lest he thereby
become a monster. and if thou gaze long into an abyss the abyss will
also gaze into thee.

. from old florentine novels--moreover from life buona femmina e
mala femmina vuol bastone.--sacchetti nov. .

. to seduce their neighbour to a favourable opinion and afterwards
to believe implicitly in this opinion of their neighbour--who can do
this conjuring trick so well as women

. that which an age considers evil is usually an unseasonable echo of
what was formerly considered good--the atavism of an old ideal.

. around the hero everything becomes a tragedy; around the
demigod everything becomes a satyr-play; and around god everything
becomes--what perhaps a world

. it is not enough to possess a talent one must also have your
permission to possess it;--eh my friends

. where there is the tree of knowledge there is always paradise
so say the most ancient and the most modern serpents.

. what is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil.

. objection evasion joyous distrust and love of irony are signs of
health; everything absolute belongs to pathology.

. the sense of the tragic increases and declines with sensuousness.

. insanity in individuals is something rare--but in groups parties
nations and epochs it is the rule.

. the thought of suicide is a great consolation by means of it one
gets successfully through many a bad night.

. not only our reason but also our conscience truckles to our
strongest impulse--the tyrant in us.

. one must repay good and ill; but why just to the person who did us
good or ill

. one no longer loves ones knowledge sufficiently after one has
communicated it.

. poets act shamelessly towards their experiences they exploit them.

. our fellow-creature is not our neighbour but our neighbours
neighbour--so thinks every nation.

. love brings to light the noble and hidden qualities of a lover--his
rare and exceptional traits it is thus liable to be deceptive as to his
normal character.

. jesus said to his jews the law was for servants;--love god as i
love him as his son! what have we sons of god to do with morals!

. in sight of every party.--a shepherd has always need of a
bell-wether--or he has himself to be a wether occasionally.

. one may indeed lie with the mouth; but with the accompanying
grimace one nevertheless tells the truth.

. to vigorous men intimacy is a matter of shame--and something
precious.

. christianity gave eros poison to drink; he did not die of it
certainly but degenerated to vice.

. to talk much about oneself may also be a means of concealing
oneself.

. in praise there is more obtrusiveness than in blame.

. pity has an almost ludicrous effect on a man of knowledge like
tender hands on a cyclops.

. one occasionally embraces some one or other out of love to mankind
because one cannot embrace all; but this is what one must never
confess to the individual.

. one does not hate as long as one disesteems but only when one
esteems equal or superior.

. ye utilitarians--ye too love the utile only as a vehicle for
your inclinations--ye too really find the noise of its wheels
insupportable!

. one loves ultimately ones desires not the thing desired.

. the vanity of others is only counter to our taste when it is
counter to our vanity.

. with regard to what truthfulness is perhaps nobody has ever been
sufficiently truthful.

. one does not believe in the follies of clever men what a
forfeiture of the rights of man!

. the consequences of our actions seize us by the forelock very
indifferent to the fact that we have meanwhile reformed.

. there is an innocence in lying which is the sign of good faith in a
cause.

. it is inhuman to bless when one is being cursed.

. the familiarity of superiors embitters one because it may not be
returned.

. i am affected not because you have deceived me but because i can
no longer believe in you.

. there is a haughtiness of kindness which has the appearance of
wickedness.

. i dislike him.--why--i am not a match for him.--did any one
ever answer so



chapter v. the natural history of morals


. the moral sentiment in europe at present is perhaps as subtle
belated diverse sensitive and refined as the science of morals
belonging thereto is recent initial awkward and coarse-fingered--an
interesting contrast which sometimes becomes incarnate and obvious
in the very person of a moralist. indeed the expression science
of morals is in respect to what is designated thereby far too
presumptuous and counter to good taste--which is always a foretaste of
more modest expressions. one ought to avow with the utmost fairness what
is still necessary here for a long time what is alone proper for the
present namely the collection of material the comprehensive survey
and classification of an immense domain of delicate sentiments of worth
and distinctions of worth which live grow propagate and perish--and
perhaps attempts to give a clear idea of the recurring and more common
forms of these living crystallizations--as preparation for a theory of
types of morality. to be sure people have not hitherto been so modest.
all the philosophers with a pedantic and ridiculous seriousness
demanded of themselves something very much higher more pretentious and
ceremonious when they concerned themselves with morality as a science
they wanted to give a basic to morality--and every philosopher hitherto
has believed that he has given it a basis; morality itself however has
been regarded as something given. how far from their awkward pride
was the seemingly insignificant problem--left in dust and decay--of a
description of forms of morality notwithstanding that the finest hands
and senses could hardly be fine enough for it! it was precisely owing to
moral philosophers knowing the moral facts imperfectly in an arbitrary
epitome or an accidental abridgement--perhaps as the morality of
their environment their position their church their zeitgeist their
climate and zone--it was precisely because they were badly instructed
with regard to nations eras and past ages and were by no means eager
to know about these matters that they did not even come in sight of the
real problems of morals--problems which only disclose themselves by
a comparison of many kinds of morality. in every science of morals
hitherto strange as it may sound the problem of morality itself
has been omitted there has been no suspicion that there was anything
problematic there! that which philosophers called giving a basis to
morality and endeavoured to realize has when seen in a right light
proved merely a learned form of good faith in prevailing morality a new
means of its expression consequently just a matter-of-fact within the
sphere of a definite morality yea in its ultimate motive a sort of
denial that it is lawful for this morality to be called in question--and
in any case the reverse of the testing analyzing doubting and
vivisecting of this very faith. hear for instance with what
innocence--almost worthy of honour--schopenhauer represents his own
task and draw your conclusions concerning the scientificness of a
science whose latest master still talks in the strain of children and
old wives the principle he says page  of the grundprobleme der
ethik footnote pages - of schopenhauers basis of morality
translated by arthur b. bullock m.a. . the axiom about the
purport of which all moralists are practically agreed neminem laede
immo omnes quantum potes juva--is really the proposition which all moral
teachers strive to establish ... the real basis of ethics which
has been sought like the philosophers stone for centuries.--the
difficulty of establishing the proposition referred to may indeed be
great--it is well known that schopenhauer also was unsuccessful in his
efforts; and whoever has thoroughly realized how absurdly false and
sentimental this proposition is in a world whose essence is will
to power may be reminded that schopenhauer although a pessimist
actually--played the flute... daily after dinner one may read about
the matter in his biography. a question by the way a pessimist a
repudiator of god and of the world who makes a halt at morality--who
assents to morality and plays the flute to laede-neminem morals what
is that really--a pessimist

. apart from the value of such assertions as there is a categorical
imperative in us one can always ask what does such an assertion
indicate about him who makes it there are systems of morals which are
meant to justify their author in the eyes of other people; other systems
of morals are meant to tranquilize him and make him self-satisfied;
with other systems he wants to crucify and humble himself with others
he wishes to take revenge with others to conceal himself with others
to glorify himself and gave superiority and distinction--this system of
morals helps its author to forget that system makes him or something
of him forgotten many a moralist would like to exercise power and
creative arbitrariness over mankind many another perhaps kant
especially gives us to understand by his morals that what is estimable
in me is that i know how to obey--and with you it shall not be
otherwise than with me! in short systems of morals are only a
sign-language of the emotions.

. in contrast to laisser-aller every system of morals is a sort of
tyranny against nature and also against reason that is however no
objection unless one should again decree by some system of morals that
all kinds of tyranny and unreasonableness are unlawful what is
essential and invaluable in every system of morals is that it is a
long constraint. in order to understand stoicism or port royal
or puritanism one should remember the constraint under which every
language has attained to strength and freedom--the metrical constraint
the tyranny of rhyme and rhythm. how much trouble have the poets and
orators of every nation given themselves!--not excepting some of
the prose writers of today in whose ear dwells an inexorable
conscientiousness--for the sake of a folly as utilitarian bunglers
say and thereby deem themselves wise--from submission to arbitrary
laws as the anarchists say and thereby fancy themselves free even
free-spirited. the singular fact remains however that everything
of the nature of freedom elegance boldness dance and masterly
certainty which exists or has existed whether it be in thought itself
or in administration or in speaking and persuading in art just as in
conduct has only developed by means of the tyranny of such arbitrary
law and in all seriousness it is not at all improbable that precisely
this is nature and natural--and not laisser-aller! every artist
knows how different from the state of letting himself go is his
most natural condition the free arranging locating disposing
and constructing in the moments of inspiration--and how strictly and
delicately he then obeys a thousand laws which by their very rigidness
and precision defy all formulation by means of ideas even the most
stable idea has in comparison therewith something floating manifold
and ambiguous in it. the essential thing in heaven and in earth is
apparently to repeat it once more that there should be long obedience
in the same direction there thereby results and has always resulted in
the long run something which has made life worth living; for instance
virtue art music dancing reason spirituality--anything whatever
that is transfiguring refined foolish or divine. the long bondage of
the spirit the distrustful constraint in the communicability of
ideas the discipline which the thinker imposed on himself to think
in accordance with the rules of a church or a court or conformable
to aristotelian premises the persistent spiritual will to interpret
everything that happened according to a christian scheme and in every
occurrence to rediscover and justify the christian god--all this
violence arbitrariness severity dreadfulness and unreasonableness
has proved itself the disciplinary means whereby the european spirit has
attained its strength its remorseless curiosity and subtle mobility;
granted also that much irrecoverable strength and spirit had to be
stifled suffocated and spoilt in the process for here as everywhere
nature shows herself as she is in all her extravagant and indifferent
magnificence which is shocking but nevertheless noble. that
for centuries european thinkers only thought in order to prove
something--nowadays on the contrary we are suspicious of every thinker
who wishes to prove something--that it was always settled beforehand
what was to be the result of their strictest thinking as it was perhaps
in the asiatic astrology of former times or as it is still at the
present day in the innocent christian-moral explanation of immediate
personal events for the glory of god or for the good of the
soul--this tyranny this arbitrariness this severe and magnificent
stupidity has educated the spirit; slavery both in the coarser and
the finer sense is apparently an indispensable means even of spiritual
education and discipline. one may look at every system of morals in this
light it is nature therein which teaches to hate the laisser-aller
the too great freedom and implants the need for limited horizons for
immediate duties--it teaches the narrowing of perspectives and thus in
a certain sense that stupidity is a condition of life and development.
thou must obey some one and for a long time; otherwise thou wilt come
to grief and lose all respect for thyself--this seems to me to be the
moral imperative of nature which is certainly neither categorical
as old kant wished consequently the otherwise nor does it address
itself to the individual what does nature care for the individual!
but to nations races ages and ranks; above all however to the
animal man generally to mankind.

. industrious races find it a great hardship to be idle it was a
master stroke of english instinct to hallow and begloom sunday to such
an extent that the englishman unconsciously hankers for his week--and
work-day again--as a kind of cleverly devised cleverly intercalated
fast such as is also frequently found in the ancient world although
as is appropriate in southern nations not precisely with respect
to work. many kinds of fasts are necessary; and wherever powerful
influences and habits prevail legislators have to see that intercalary
days are appointed on which such impulses are fettered and learn to
hunger anew. viewed from a higher standpoint whole generations and
epochs when they show themselves infected with any moral fanaticism
seem like those intercalated periods of restraint and fasting during
which an impulse learns to humble and submit itself--at the same time
also to purify and sharpen itself; certain philosophical sects likewise
admit of a similar interpretation for instance the stoa in the midst
of hellenic culture with the atmosphere rank and overcharged with
aphrodisiacal odours.--here also is a hint for the explanation of the
paradox why it was precisely in the most christian period of european
history and in general only under the pressure of christian sentiments
that the sexual impulse sublimated into love amour-passion.

. there is something in the morality of plato which does not really
belong to plato but which only appears in his philosophy one might
say in spite of him namely socratism for which he himself was
too noble. no one desires to injure himself hence all evil is done
unwittingly. the evil man inflicts injury on himself; he would not do
so however if he knew that evil is evil. the evil man therefore is
only evil through error; if one free him from error one will necessarily
make him--good.--this mode of reasoning savours of the populace who
perceive only the unpleasant consequences of evil-doing and practically
judge that it is stupid to do wrong; while they accept good as
identical with useful and pleasant without further thought. as
regards every system of utilitarianism one may at once assume that it
has the same origin and follow the scent one will seldom err.--plato
did all he could to interpret something refined and noble into the
tenets of his teacher and above all to interpret himself into them--he
the most daring of all interpreters who lifted the entire socrates out
of the street as a popular theme and song to exhibit him in endless
and impossible modifications--namely in all his own disguises and
multiplicities. in jest and in homeric language as well what is the
platonic socrates if not--greek words inserted here.

. the old theological problem of faith and knowledge or more
plainly of instinct and reason--the question whether in respect to the
valuation of things instinct deserves more authority than rationality
which wants to appreciate and act according to motives according to
a why that is to say in conformity to purpose and utility--it
is always the old moral problem that first appeared in the person of
socrates and had divided mens minds long before christianity. socrates
himself following of course the taste of his talent--that of a
surpassing dialectician--took first the side of reason; and in fact
what did he do all his life but laugh at the awkward incapacity of the
noble athenians who were men of instinct like all noble men and could
never give satisfactory answers concerning the motives of their actions
in the end however though silently and secretly he laughed also
at himself with his finer conscience and introspection he found
in himself the same difficulty and incapacity. but why--he said
to himself--should one on that account separate oneself from the
instincts! one must set them right and the reason also--one must follow
the instincts but at the same time persuade the reason to support them
with good arguments. this was the real falseness of that great and
mysterious ironist; he brought his conscience up to the point that he
was satisfied with a kind of self-outwitting in fact he perceived
the irrationality in the moral judgment.--plato more innocent in such
matters and without the craftiness of the plebeian wished to prove to
himself at the expenditure of all his strength--the greatest strength
a philosopher had ever expended--that reason and instinct lead
spontaneously to one goal to the good to god; and since plato all
theologians and philosophers have followed the same path--which means
that in matters of morality instinct or as christians call it
faith or as i call it the herd has hitherto triumphed. unless
one should make an exception in the case of descartes the father of
rationalism and consequently the grandfather of the revolution who
recognized only the authority of reason but reason is only a tool and
descartes was superficial.

. whoever has followed the history of a single science finds in
its development a clue to the understanding of the oldest and commonest
processes of all knowledge and cognizance there as here the
premature hypotheses the fictions the good stupid will to belief
and the lack of distrust and patience are first developed--our senses
learn late and never learn completely to be subtle reliable and
cautious organs of knowledge. our eyes find it easier on a given
occasion to produce a picture already often produced than to seize upon
the divergence and novelty of an impression the latter requires more
force more morality. it is difficult and painful for the ear to
listen to anything new; we hear strange music badly. when we hear
another language spoken we involuntarily attempt to form the sounds
into words with which we are more familiar and conversant--it was thus
for example that the germans modified the spoken word arcubalista into
armbrust cross-bow. our senses are also hostile and averse to the
new; and generally even in the simplest processes of sensation the
emotions dominate--such as fear love hatred and the passive emotion
of indolence.--as little as a reader nowadays reads all the single words
not to speak of syllables of a page--he rather takes about five out
of every twenty words at random and guesses the probably appropriate
sense to them--just as little do we see a tree correctly and completely
in respect to its leaves branches colour and shape; we find it so
much easier to fancy the chance of a tree. even in the midst of the
most remarkable experiences we still do just the same; we fabricate the
greater part of the experience and can hardly be made to contemplate
any event except as inventors thereof. all this goes to prove
that from our fundamental nature and from remote ages we have
been--accustomed to lying. or to express it more politely and
hypocritically in short more pleasantly--one is much more of an artist
than one is aware of.--in an animated conversation i often see the face
of the person with whom i am speaking so clearly and sharply defined
before me according to the thought he expresses or which i believe to
be evoked in his mind that the degree of distinctness far exceeds the
strength of my visual faculty--the delicacy of the play of the muscles
and of the expression of the eyes must therefore be imagined by me.
probably the person put on quite a different expression or none at all.

. quidquid luce fuit tenebris agit but also contrariwise. what we
experience in dreams provided we experience it often pertains at
last just as much to the general belongings of our soul as anything
actually experienced; by virtue thereof we are richer or poorer we
have a requirement more or less and finally in broad daylight and
even in the brightest moments of our waking life we are ruled to some
extent by the nature of our dreams. supposing that someone has often
flown in his dreams and that at last as soon as he dreams he is
conscious of the power and art of flying as his privilege and his
peculiarly enviable happiness; such a person who believes that on the
slightest impulse he can actualize all sorts of curves and angles who
knows the sensation of a certain divine levity an upwards
without effort or constraint a downwards without descending
or lowering--without trouble!--how could the man with such
dream-experiences and dream-habits fail to find happiness differently
coloured and defined even in his waking hours! how could he fail--to
long differently for happiness flight such as is described by poets
must when compared with his own flying be far too earthly muscular
violent far too troublesome for him.

. the difference among men does not manifest itself only in the
difference of their lists of desirable things--in their regarding
different good things as worth striving for and being disagreed as to
the greater or less value the order of rank of the commonly recognized
desirable things--it manifests itself much more in what they regard as
actually having and possessing a desirable thing. as regards a woman
for instance the control over her body and her sexual gratification
serves as an amply sufficient sign of ownership and possession to the
more modest man; another with a more suspicious and ambitious thirst for
possession sees the questionableness the mere apparentness of such
ownership and wishes to have finer tests in order to know especially
whether the woman not only gives herself to him but also gives up for
his sake what she has or would like to have--only then does he look upon
her as possessed. a third however has not even here got to the limit
of his distrust and his desire for possession he asks himself whether
the woman when she gives up everything for him does not perhaps do
so for a phantom of him; he wishes first to be thoroughly indeed
profoundly well known; in order to be loved at all he ventures to let
himself be found out. only then does he feel the beloved one fully in
his possession when she no longer deceives herself about him when
she loves him just as much for the sake of his devilry and concealed
insatiability as for his goodness patience and spirituality. one
man would like to possess a nation and he finds all the higher arts of
cagliostro and catalina suitable for his purpose. another with a more
refined thirst for possession says to himself one may not deceive
where one desires to possess--he is irritated and impatient at the idea
that a mask of him should rule in the hearts of the people i must
therefore make myself known and first of all learn to know myself!
among helpful and charitable people one almost always finds the awkward
craftiness which first gets up suitably him who has to be helped as
though for instance he should merit help seek just their help and
would show himself deeply grateful attached and subservient to them
for all help. with these conceits they take control of the needy as a
property just as in general they are charitable and helpful out of a
desire for property. one finds them jealous when they are crossed or
forestalled in their charity. parents involuntarily make something like
themselves out of their children--they call that education; no mother
doubts at the bottom of her heart that the child she has borne is
thereby her property no father hesitates about his right to his own
ideas and notions of worth. indeed in former times fathers deemed it
right to use their discretion concerning the life or death of the newly
born as among the ancient germans. and like the father so also do the
teacher the class the priest and the prince still see in every new
individual an unobjectionable opportunity for a new possession. the
consequence is...

. the jews--a people born for slavery as tacitus and the whole
ancient world say of them; the chosen people among the nations as
they themselves say and believe--the jews performed the miracle of the
inversion of valuations by means of which life on earth obtained a new
and dangerous charm for a couple of millenniums. their prophets fused
into one the expressions rich godless wicked violent
sensual and for the first time coined the word world as a term of
reproach. in this inversion of valuations in which is also included
the use of the word poor as synonymous with saint and friend the
significance of the jewish people is to be found; it is with them that
the slave-insurrection in morals commences.

. it is to be inferred that there are countless dark bodies near the
sun--such as we shall never see. among ourselves this is an allegory;
and the psychologist of morals reads the whole star-writing merely as an
allegorical and symbolic language in which much may be unexpressed.

. the beast of prey and the man of prey for instance caesar borgia
are fundamentally misunderstood nature is misunderstood so long as
one seeks a morbidness in the constitution of these healthiest of
all tropical monsters and growths or even an innate hell in them--as
almost all moralists have done hitherto. does it not seem that there is
a hatred of the virgin forest and of the tropics among moralists and
that the tropical man must be discredited at all costs whether
as disease and deterioration of mankind or as his own hell and
self-torture and why in favour of the temperate zones in favour
of the temperate men the moral the mediocre--this for the chapter
morals as timidity.

. all the systems of morals which address themselves with a view to
their happiness as it is called--what else are they but suggestions
for behaviour adapted to the degree of danger from themselves in which
the individuals live; recipes for their passions their good and bad
propensities insofar as such have the will to power and would like
to play the master; small and great expediencies and elaborations
permeated with the musty odour of old family medicines and old-wife
wisdom; all of them grotesque and absurd in their form--because
they address themselves to all because they generalize where
generalization is not authorized; all of them speaking unconditionally
and taking themselves unconditionally; all of them flavoured not merely
with one grain of salt but rather endurable only and sometimes even
seductive when they are over-spiced and begin to smell dangerously
especially of the other world. that is all of little value when
estimated intellectually and is far from being science much less
wisdom; but repeated once more and three times repeated it is
expediency expediency expediency mixed with stupidity stupidity
stupidity--whether it be the indifference and statuesque coldness
towards the heated folly of the emotions which the stoics advised and
fostered; or the no-more-laughing and no-more-weeping of spinoza the
destruction of the emotions by their analysis and vivisection which he
recommended so naively; or the lowering of the emotions to an innocent
mean at which they may be satisfied the aristotelianism of morals;
or even morality as the enjoyment of the emotions in a voluntary
attenuation and spiritualization by the symbolism of art perhaps as
music or as love of god and of mankind for gods sake--for in religion
the passions are once more enfranchised provided that...; or finally
even the complaisant and wanton surrender to the emotions as has
been taught by hafis and goethe the bold letting-go of the reins the
spiritual and corporeal licentia morum in the exceptional cases of
wise old codgers and drunkards with whom it no longer has much
danger.--this also for the chapter morals as timidity.

. inasmuch as in all ages as long as mankind has existed there have
also been human herds family alliances communities tribes peoples
states churches and always a great number who obey in proportion
to the small number who command--in view therefore of the fact that
obedience has been most practiced and fostered among mankind hitherto
one may reasonably suppose that generally speaking the need thereof is
now innate in every one as a kind of formal conscience which gives
the command thou shalt unconditionally do something unconditionally
refrain from something in short thou shalt. this need tries to
satisfy itself and to fill its form with a content according to its
strength impatience and eagerness it at once seizes as an omnivorous
appetite with little selection and accepts whatever is shouted into
its ear by all sorts of commanders--parents teachers laws class
prejudices or public opinion. the extraordinary limitation of human
development the hesitation protractedness frequent retrogression and
turning thereof is attributable to the fact that the herd-instinct of
obedience is transmitted best and at the cost of the art of command. if
one imagine this instinct increasing to its greatest extent commanders
and independent individuals will finally be lacking altogether or they
will suffer inwardly from a bad conscience and will have to impose
a deception on themselves in the first place in order to be able to
command just as if they also were only obeying. this condition of things
actually exists in europe at present--i call it the moral hypocrisy of
the commanding class. they know no other way of protecting themselves
from their bad conscience than by playing the role of executors of older
and higher orders of predecessors of the constitution of justice of
the law or of god himself or they even justify themselves by maxims
from the current opinions of the herd as first servants of their
people or instruments of the public weal. on the other hand the
gregarious european man nowadays assumes an air as if he were the only
kind of man that is allowable he glorifies his qualities such as
public spirit kindness deference industry temperance modesty
indulgence sympathy by virtue of which he is gentle endurable and
useful to the herd as the peculiarly human virtues. in cases however
where it is believed that the leader and bell-wether cannot be dispensed
with attempt after attempt is made nowadays to replace commanders
by the summing together of clever gregarious men all representative
constitutions for example are of this origin. in spite of all what a
blessing what a deliverance from a weight becoming unendurable is the
appearance of an absolute ruler for these gregarious europeans--of this
fact the effect of the appearance of napoleon was the last great proof
the history of the influence of napoleon is almost the history of
the higher happiness to which the entire century has attained in its
worthiest individuals and periods.

. the man of an age of dissolution which mixes the races with
one another who has the inheritance of a diversified descent in his
body--that is to say contrary and often not only contrary instincts
and standards of value which struggle with one another and are seldom
at peace--such a man of late culture and broken lights will on an
average be a weak man. his fundamental desire is that the war which is
in him should come to an end; happiness appears to him in the character
of a soothing medicine and mode of thought for instance epicurean
or christian; it is above all things the happiness of repose of
undisturbedness of repletion of final unity--it is the sabbath of
sabbaths to use the expression of the holy rhetorician st. augustine
who was himself such a man.--should however the contrariety and
conflict in such natures operate as an additional incentive and stimulus
to life--and if on the other hand in addition to their powerful and
irreconcilable instincts they have also inherited and indoctrinated
into them a proper mastery and subtlety for carrying on the conflict
with themselves that is to say the faculty of self-control and
self-deception there then arise those marvelously incomprehensible and
inexplicable beings those enigmatical men predestined for conquering
and circumventing others the finest examples of which are alcibiades
and caesar with whom i should like to associate the first of europeans
according to my taste the hohenstaufen frederick the second and
among artists perhaps leonardo da vinci. they appear precisely in the
same periods when that weaker type with its longing for repose comes
to the front; the two types are complementary to each other and spring
from the same causes.

. as long as the utility which determines moral estimates is only
gregarious utility as long as the preservation of the community is only
kept in view and the immoral is sought precisely and exclusively in
what seems dangerous to the maintenance of the community there can be
no morality of love to ones neighbour. granted even that there is
already a little constant exercise of consideration sympathy fairness
gentleness and mutual assistance granted that even in this condition
of society all those instincts are already active which are latterly
distinguished by honourable names as virtues and eventually almost
coincide with the conception morality in that period they do not
as yet belong to the domain of moral valuations--they are still
ultra-moral. a sympathetic action for instance is neither called good
nor bad moral nor immoral in the best period of the romans; and should
it be praised a sort of resentful disdain is compatible with this
praise even at the best directly the sympathetic action is compared
with one which contributes to the welfare of the whole to the res
publica. after all love to our neighbour is always a secondary
matter partly conventional and arbitrarily manifested in relation to
our fear of our neighbour. after the fabric of society seems on the
whole established and secured against external dangers it is this
fear of our neighbour which again creates new perspectives of moral
valuation. certain strong and dangerous instincts such as the love of
enterprise foolhardiness revengefulness astuteness rapacity and
love of power which up till then had not only to be honoured from the
point of view of general utility--under other names of course than
those here given--but had to be fostered and cultivated because they
were perpetually required in the common danger against the common
enemies are now felt in their dangerousness to be doubly strong--when
the outlets for them are lacking--and are gradually branded as immoral
and given over to calumny. the contrary instincts and inclinations now
attain to moral honour the gregarious instinct gradually draws its
conclusions. how much or how little dangerousness to the community or
to equality is contained in an opinion a condition an emotion a
disposition or an endowment--that is now the moral perspective here
again fear is the mother of morals. it is by the loftiest and strongest
instincts when they break out passionately and carry the individual
far above and beyond the average and the low level of the gregarious
conscience that the self-reliance of the community is destroyed its
belief in itself its backbone as it were breaks consequently these
very instincts will be most branded and defamed. the lofty independent
spirituality the will to stand alone and even the cogent reason are
felt to be dangers everything that elevates the individual above the
herd and is a source of fear to the neighbour is henceforth called
evil the tolerant unassuming self-adapting self-equalizing
disposition the mediocrity of desires attains to moral distinction and
honour. finally under very peaceful circumstances there is always
less opportunity and necessity for training the feelings to severity
and rigour and now every form of severity even in justice begins
to disturb the conscience a lofty and rigorous nobleness and
self-responsibility almost offends and awakens distrust the lamb
and still more the sheep wins respect. there is a point of diseased
mellowness and effeminacy in the history of society at which society
itself takes the part of him who injures it the part of the criminal
and does so in fact seriously and honestly. to punish appears to it
to be somehow unfair--it is certain that the idea of punishment and
the obligation to punish are then painful and alarming to people. is
it not sufficient if the criminal be rendered harmless why should we
still punish punishment itself is terrible!--with these questions
gregarious morality the morality of fear draws its ultimate
conclusion. if one could at all do away with danger the cause of fear
one would have done away with this morality at the same time it
would no longer be necessary it would not consider itself any longer
necessary!--whoever examines the conscience of the present-day european
will always elicit the same imperative from its thousand moral folds
and hidden recesses the imperative of the timidity of the herd we wish
that some time or other there may be nothing more to fear! some time
or other--the will and the way thereto is nowadays called progress all
over europe.

. let us at once say again what we have already said a hundred
times for peoples ears nowadays are unwilling to hear such truths--our
truths. we know well enough how offensive it sounds when any one
plainly and without metaphor counts man among the animals but it will
be accounted to us almost a crime that it is precisely in respect to
men of modern ideas that we have constantly applied the terms herd
herd-instincts and such like expressions. what avail is it we cannot
do otherwise for it is precisely here that our new insight is. we
have found that in all the principal moral judgments europe has become
unanimous including likewise the countries where european influence
prevails in europe people evidently know what socrates thought he
did not know and what the famous serpent of old once promised to
teach--they know today what is good and evil. it must then sound hard
and be distasteful to the ear when we always insist that that which
here thinks it knows that which here glorifies itself with praise
and blame and calls itself good is the instinct of the herding human
animal the instinct which has come and is ever coming more and more
to the front to preponderance and supremacy over other instincts
according to the increasing physiological approximation and resemblance
of which it is the symptom. morality in europe at present is
herding-animal morality and therefore as we understand the matter
only one kind of human morality beside which before which and after
which many other moralities and above all higher moralities are or
should be possible. against such a possibility against such a should
be however this morality defends itself with all its strength it
says obstinately and inexorably i am morality itself and nothing else
is morality! indeed with the help of a religion which has humoured
and flattered the sublimest desires of the herding-animal things have
reached such a point that we always find a more visible expression of
this morality even in political and social arrangements the democratic
movement is the inheritance of the christian movement. that its tempo
however is much too slow and sleepy for the more impatient ones for
those who are sick and distracted by the herding-instinct is indicated
by the increasingly furious howling and always less disguised
teeth-gnashing of the anarchist dogs who are now roving through the
highways of european culture. apparently in opposition to the peacefully
industrious democrats and revolution-ideologues and still more so
to the awkward philosophasters and fraternity-visionaries who call
themselves socialists and want a free society those are really at one
with them all in their thorough and instinctive hostility to every form
of society other than that of the autonomous herd to the extent even of
repudiating the notions master and servant--ni dieu ni maitre says
a socialist formula; at one in their tenacious opposition to every
special claim every special right and privilege this means ultimately
opposition to every right for when all are equal no one needs rights
any longer; at one in their distrust of punitive justice as though it
were a violation of the weak unfair to the necessary consequences of
all former society; but equally at one in their religion of sympathy
in their compassion for all that feels lives and suffers down to the
very animals up even to god--the extravagance of sympathy for
god belongs to a democratic age; altogether at one in the cry and
impatience of their sympathy in their deadly hatred of suffering
generally in their almost feminine incapacity for witnessing it or
allowing it; at one in their involuntary beglooming and heart-softening
under the spell of which europe seems to be threatened with a new
buddhism; at one in their belief in the morality of mutual sympathy as
though it were morality in itself the climax the attained climax of
mankind the sole hope of the future the consolation of the present
the great discharge from all the obligations of the past; altogether at
one in their belief in the community as the deliverer in the herd and
therefore in themselves.

. we who hold a different belief--we who regard the democratic
movement not only as a degenerating form of political organization but
as equivalent to a degenerating a waning type of man as involving his
mediocrising and depreciation where have we to fix our hopes in
new philosophers--there is no other alternative in minds strong and
original enough to initiate opposite estimates of value to transvalue
and invert eternal valuations; in forerunners in men of the future
who in the present shall fix the constraints and fasten the knots which
will compel millenniums to take new paths. to teach man the future
of humanity as his will as depending on human will and to make
preparation for vast hazardous enterprises and collective attempts in
rearing and educating in order thereby to put an end to the frightful
rule of folly and chance which has hitherto gone by the name of
history the folly of the greatest number is only its last
form--for that purpose a new type of philosopher and commander will
some time or other be needed at the very idea of which everything that
has existed in the way of occult terrible and benevolent beings might
look pale and dwarfed. the image of such leaders hovers before our
eyes--is it lawful for me to say it aloud ye free spirits the
conditions which one would partly have to create and partly utilize for
their genesis; the presumptive methods and tests by virtue of which
a soul should grow up to such an elevation and power as to feel a
constraint to these tasks; a transvaluation of values under the new
pressure and hammer of which a conscience should be steeled and a heart
transformed into brass so as to bear the weight of such responsibility;
and on the other hand the necessity for such leaders the dreadful
danger that they might be lacking or miscarry and degenerate--these
are our real anxieties and glooms ye know it well ye free spirits!
these are the heavy distant thoughts and storms which sweep across the
heaven of our life. there are few pains so grievous as to have seen
divined or experienced how an exceptional man has missed his way and
deteriorated; but he who has the rare eye for the universal danger
of man himself deteriorating he who like us has recognized the
extraordinary fortuitousness which has hitherto played its game in
respect to the future of mankind--a game in which neither the hand nor
even a finger of god has participated!--he who divines the fate that
is hidden under the idiotic unwariness and blind confidence of
modern ideas and still more under the whole of christo-european
morality--suffers from an anguish with which no other is to be compared.
he sees at a glance all that could still be made out of man through
a favourable accumulation and augmentation of human powers and
arrangements; he knows with all the knowledge of his conviction how
unexhausted man still is for the greatest possibilities and how often
in the past the type man has stood in presence of mysterious decisions
and new paths--he knows still better from his painfulest recollections
on what wretched obstacles promising developments of the highest rank
have hitherto usually gone to pieces broken down sunk and become
contemptible. the universal degeneracy of mankind to the level of
the man of the future--as idealized by the socialistic fools and
shallow-pates--this degeneracy and dwarfing of man to an absolutely
gregarious animal or as they call it to a man of free society
this brutalizing of man into a pigmy with equal rights and claims is
undoubtedly possible! he who has thought out this possibility to its
ultimate conclusion knows another loathing unknown to the rest of
mankind--and perhaps also a new mission!



chapter vi. we scholars


. at the risk that moralizing may also reveal itself here as that
which it has always been--namely resolutely montrer ses plaies
according to balzac--i would venture to protest against an improper and
injurious alteration of rank which quite unnoticed and as if with the
best conscience threatens nowadays to establish itself in the relations
of science and philosophy. i mean to say that one must have the right
out of ones own experience--experience as it seems to me always
implies unfortunate experience--to treat of such an important question
of rank so as not to speak of colour like the blind or against science
like women and artists ah! this dreadful science! sigh their instinct
and their shame it always finds things out!. the declaration of
independence of the scientific man his emancipation from philosophy
is one of the subtler after-effects of democratic organization and
disorganization the self-glorification and self-conceitedness of
the learned man is now everywhere in full bloom and in its best
springtime--which does not mean to imply that in this case self-praise
smells sweet. here also the instinct of the populace cries freedom
from all masters! and after science has with the happiest results
resisted theology whose hand-maid it had been too long it now
proposes in its wantonness and indiscretion to lay down laws for
philosophy and in its turn to play the master--what am i saying!
to play the philosopher on its own account. my memory--the memory of
a scientific man if you please!--teems with the naivetes of insolence
which i have heard about philosophy and philosophers from young
naturalists and old physicians not to mention the most cultured and
most conceited of all learned men the philologists and schoolmasters
who are both the one and the other by profession. on one occasion it
was the specialist and the jack horner who instinctively stood on the
defensive against all synthetic tasks and capabilities; at another time
it was the industrious worker who had got a scent of otium and refined
luxuriousness in the internal economy of the philosopher and felt
himself aggrieved and belittled thereby. on another occasion it was the
colour-blindness of the utilitarian who sees nothing in philosophy but
a series of refuted systems and an extravagant expenditure which does
nobody any good. at another time the fear of disguised mysticism and of
the boundary-adjustment of knowledge became conspicuous at another
time the disregard of individual philosophers which had involuntarily
extended to disregard of philosophy generally. in fine i found most
frequently behind the proud disdain of philosophy in young scholars
the evil after-effect of some particular philosopher to whom on the
whole obedience had been foresworn without however the spell of his
scornful estimates of other philosophers having been got rid of--the
result being a general ill-will to all philosophy. such seems to
me for instance the after-effect of schopenhauer on the most modern
germany by his unintelligent rage against hegel he has succeeded in
severing the whole of the last generation of germans from its connection
with german culture which culture all things considered has been
an elevation and a divining refinement of the historical sense but
precisely at this point schopenhauer himself was poor irreceptive
and un-german to the extent of ingeniousness. on the whole speaking
generally it may just have been the humanness all-too-humanness of the
modern philosophers themselves in short their contemptibleness which
has injured most radically the reverence for philosophy and opened the
doors to the instinct of the populace. let it but be acknowledged to
what an extent our modern world diverges from the whole style of the
world of heraclitus plato empedocles and whatever else all the royal
and magnificent anchorites of the spirit were called and with what
justice an honest man of science may feel himself of a better family and
origin in view of such representatives of philosophy who owing to
the fashion of the present day are just as much aloft as they are down
below--in germany for instance the two lions of berlin the anarchist
eugen duhring and the amalgamist eduard von hartmann. it is especially
the sight of those hotch-potch philosophers who call themselves
realists or positivists which is calculated to implant a
dangerous distrust in the soul of a young and ambitious scholar those
philosophers at the best are themselves but scholars and specialists
that is very evident! all of them are persons who have been vanquished
and brought back again under the dominion of science who at one time
or another claimed more from themselves without having a right to the
more and its responsibility--and who now creditably rancorously and
vindictively represent in word and deed disbelief in the master-task
and supremacy of philosophy after all how could it be otherwise
science flourishes nowadays and has the good conscience clearly visible
on its countenance while that to which the entire modern philosophy has
gradually sunk the remnant of philosophy of the present day excites
distrust and displeasure if not scorn and pity philosophy reduced to
a theory of knowledge no more in fact than a diffident science of
epochs and doctrine of forbearance a philosophy that never even
gets beyond the threshold and rigorously denies itself the right
to enter--that is philosophy in its last throes an end an agony
something that awakens pity. how could such a philosophy--rule!

. the dangers that beset the evolution of the philosopher are in
fact so manifold nowadays that one might doubt whether this fruit
could still come to maturity. the extent and towering structure of the
sciences have increased enormously and therewith also the probability
that the philosopher will grow tired even as a learner or will attach
himself somewhere and specialize so that he will no longer attain to
his elevation that is to say to his superspection his circumspection
and his despection. or he gets aloft too late when the best of his
maturity and strength is past or when he is impaired coarsened and
deteriorated so that his view his general estimate of things is no
longer of much importance. it is perhaps just the refinement of his
intellectual conscience that makes him hesitate and linger on the
way he dreads the temptation to become a dilettante a millepede a
milleantenna he knows too well that as a discerner one who has lost
his self-respect no longer commands no longer leads unless he should
aspire to become a great play-actor a philosophical cagliostro and
spiritual rat-catcher--in short a misleader. this is in the last
instance a question of taste if it has not really been a question of
conscience. to double once more the philosophers difficulties there is
also the fact that he demands from himself a verdict a yea or nay not
concerning science but concerning life and the worth of life--he learns
unwillingly to believe that it is his right and even his duty to obtain
this verdict and he has to seek his way to the right and the belief
only through the most extensive perhaps disturbing and destroying
experiences often hesitating doubting and dumbfounded. in fact the
philosopher has long been mistaken and confused by the multitude either
with the scientific man and ideal scholar or with the religiously
elevated desensualized desecularized visionary and god-intoxicated
man; and even yet when one hears anybody praised because he lives
wisely or as a philosopher it hardly means anything more than
prudently and apart. wisdom that seems to the populace to be a kind
of flight a means and artifice for withdrawing successfully from a
bad game; but the genuine philosopher--does it not seem so to us
my friends--lives unphilosophically and unwisely above all
imprudently and feels the obligation and burden of a hundred attempts
and temptations of life--he risks himself constantly he plays this bad
game.

. in relation to the genius that is to say a being who either
engenders or produces--both words understood in their fullest sense--the
man of learning the scientific average man has always something of
the old maid about him; for like her he is not conversant with the two
principal functions of man. to both of course to the scholar and
to the old maid one concedes respectability as if by way of
indemnification--in these cases one emphasizes the respectability--and
yet in the compulsion of this concession one has the same admixture
of vexation. let us examine more closely what is the scientific man
firstly a commonplace type of man with commonplace virtues that is
to say a non-ruling non-authoritative and non-self-sufficient type
of man; he possesses industry patient adaptableness to rank and file
equability and moderation in capacity and requirement; he has the
instinct for people like himself and for that which they require--for
instance the portion of independence and green meadow without which
there is no rest from labour the claim to honour and consideration
which first and foremost presupposes recognition and recognisability
the sunshine of a good name the perpetual ratification of his value and
usefulness with which the inward distrust which lies at the bottom of
the heart of all dependent men and gregarious animals has again and
again to be overcome. the learned man as is appropriate has also
maladies and faults of an ignoble kind he is full of petty envy and
has a lynx-eye for the weak points in those natures to whose elevations
he cannot attain. he is confiding yet only as one who lets himself go
but does not flow; and precisely before the man of the great current he
stands all the colder and more reserved--his eye is then like a smooth
and irresponsive lake which is no longer moved by rapture or sympathy.
the worst and most dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable results
from the instinct of mediocrity of his type from the jesuitism of
mediocrity which labours instinctively for the destruction of
the exceptional man and endeavours to break--or still better to
relax--every bent bow to relax of course with consideration and
naturally with an indulgent hand--to relax with confiding sympathy
that is the real art of jesuitism which has always understood how to
introduce itself as the religion of sympathy.

. however gratefully one may welcome the objective spirit--and
who has not been sick to death of all subjectivity and its confounded
ipsisimosity!--in the end however one must learn caution even with
regard to ones gratitude and put a stop to the exaggeration with
which the unselfing and depersonalizing of the spirit has recently been
celebrated as if it were the goal in itself as if it were salvation
and glorification--as is especially accustomed to happen in the
pessimist school which has also in its turn good reasons for paying the
highest honours to disinterested knowledge the objective man who no
longer curses and scolds like the pessimist the ideal man of learning
in whom the scientific instinct blossoms forth fully after a thousand
complete and partial failures is assuredly one of the most costly
instruments that exist but his place is in the hand of one who is more
powerful he is only an instrument we may say he is a mirror--he is no
purpose in himself the objective man is in truth a mirror accustomed
to prostration before everything that wants to be known with such
desires only as knowing or reflecting implies--he waits until
something comes and then expands himself sensitively so that even the
light footsteps and gliding-past of spiritual beings may not be lost on
his surface and film whatever personality he still possesses seems to
him accidental arbitrary or still oftener disturbing so much has he
come to regard himself as the passage and reflection of outside forms
and events he calls up the recollection of himself with an effort
and not infrequently wrongly he readily confounds himself with other
persons he makes mistakes with regard to his own needs and here only
is he unrefined and negligent perhaps he is troubled about the health
or the pettiness and confined atmosphere of wife and friend or the lack
of companions and society--indeed he sets himself to reflect on his
suffering but in vain! his thoughts already rove away to the more
general case and tomorrow he knows as little as he knew yesterday how
to help himself he does not now take himself seriously and devote time
to himself he is serene not from lack of trouble but from lack
of capacity for grasping and dealing with his trouble the habitual
complaisance with respect to all objects and experiences the radiant
and impartial hospitality with which he receives everything that
comes his way his habit of inconsiderate good-nature of dangerous
indifference as to yea and nay alas! there are enough of cases in which
he has to atone for these virtues of his!--and as man generally he
becomes far too easily the caput mortuum of such virtues. should one
wish love or hatred from him--i mean love and hatred as god woman and
animal understand them--he will do what he can and furnish what he can.
but one must not be surprised if it should not be much--if he should
show himself just at this point to be false fragile questionable and
deteriorated. his love is constrained his hatred is artificial and
rather un tour de force a slight ostentation and exaggeration. he is
only genuine so far as he can be objective; only in his serene totality
is he still nature and natural. his mirroring and eternally
self-polishing soul no longer knows how to affirm no longer how to
deny; he does not command; neither does he destroy. je ne meprise
presque rien--he says with leibniz let us not overlook nor undervalue
the presque! neither is he a model man; he does not go in advance of any
one nor after either; he places himself generally too far off to have
any reason for espousing the cause of either good or evil. if he has
been so long confounded with the philosopher with the caesarian trainer
and dictator of civilization he has had far too much honour and what
is more essential in him has been overlooked--he is an instrument
something of a slave though certainly the sublimest sort of slave but
nothing in himself--presque rien! the objective man is an instrument
a costly easily injured easily tarnished measuring instrument and
mirroring apparatus which is to be taken care of and respected; but he
is no goal not outgoing nor upgoing no complementary man in whom the
rest of existence justifies itself no termination--and still less a
commencement an engendering or primary cause nothing hardy powerful
self-centred that wants to be master; but rather only a soft inflated
delicate movable potters-form that must wait for some kind of content
and frame to shape itself thereto--for the most part a man without
frame and content a selfless man. consequently also nothing for
women in parenthesi.

. when a philosopher nowadays makes known that he is not a skeptic--i
hope that has been gathered from the foregoing description of the
objective spirit--people all hear it impatiently; they regard him on
that account with some apprehension they would like to ask so many
many questions... indeed among timid hearers of whom there are now so
many he is henceforth said to be dangerous. with his repudiation of
skepticism it seems to them as if they heard some evil-threatening
sound in the distance as if a new kind of explosive were being tried
somewhere a dynamite of the spirit perhaps a newly discovered russian
nihiline a pessimism bonae voluntatis that not only denies means
denial but--dreadful thought! practises denial. against this kind of
good-will--a will to the veritable actual negation of life--there is
as is generally acknowledged nowadays no better soporific and sedative
than skepticism the mild pleasing lulling poppy of skepticism;
and hamlet himself is now prescribed by the doctors of the day as an
antidote to the spirit and its underground noises. are not our ears
already full of bad sounds say the skeptics as lovers of repose and
almost as a kind of safety police; this subterranean nay is terrible!
be still ye pessimistic moles! the skeptic in effect that delicate
creature is far too easily frightened; his conscience is schooled so
as to start at every nay and even at that sharp decided yea and feels
something like a bite thereby. yea! and nay!--they seem to him opposed
to morality; he loves on the contrary to make a festival to his virtue
by a noble aloofness while perhaps he says with montaigne what do i
know or with socrates i know that i know nothing. or here i do
not trust myself no door is open to me. or even if the door were
open why should i enter immediately or what is the use of any hasty
hypotheses it might quite well be in good taste to make no hypotheses
at all. are you absolutely obliged to straighten at once what is
crooked to stuff every hole with some kind of oakum is there not time
enough for that has not the time leisure oh ye demons can ye not
at all wait the uncertain also has its charms the sphinx too is a
circe and circe too was a philosopher.--thus does a skeptic console
himself; and in truth he needs some consolation. for skepticism is
the most spiritual expression of a certain many-sided physiological
temperament which in ordinary language is called nervous debility and
sickliness; it arises whenever races or classes which have been long
separated decisively and suddenly blend with one another. in the new
generation which has inherited as it were different standards and
valuations in its blood everything is disquiet derangement doubt and
tentativeness; the best powers operate restrictively the very virtues
prevent each other growing and becoming strong equilibrium ballast
and perpendicular stability are lacking in body and soul. that however
which is most diseased and degenerated in such nondescripts is the
will; they are no longer familiar with independence of decision or
the courageous feeling of pleasure in willing--they are doubtful of the
freedom of the will even in their dreams our present-day europe
the scene of a senseless precipitate attempt at a radical blending of
classes and consequently of races is therefore skeptical in all its
heights and depths sometimes exhibiting the mobile skepticism which
springs impatiently and wantonly from branch to branch sometimes with
gloomy aspect like a cloud over-charged with interrogative signs--and
often sick unto death of its will! paralysis of will where do we not
find this cripple sitting nowadays! and yet how bedecked oftentimes how
seductively ornamented! there are the finest gala dresses and disguises
for this disease and that for instance most of what places itself
nowadays in the show-cases as objectiveness the scientific spirit
lart pour lart and pure voluntary knowledge is only decked-out
skepticism and paralysis of will--i am ready to answer for this
diagnosis of the european disease--the disease of the will is diffused
unequally over europe it is worst and most varied where civilization
has longest prevailed it decreases according as the barbarian
still--or again--asserts his claims under the loose drapery of western
culture it is therefore in the france of today as can be readily
disclosed and comprehended that the will is most infirm and france
which has always had a masterly aptitude for converting even the
portentous crises of its spirit into something charming and seductive
now manifests emphatically its intellectual ascendancy over europe
by being the school and exhibition of all the charms of skepticism the
power to will and to persist moreover in a resolution is already
somewhat stronger in germany and again in the north of germany it
is stronger than in central germany it is considerably stronger in
england spain and corsica associated with phlegm in the former and
with hard skulls in the latter--not to mention italy which is too young
yet to know what it wants and must first show whether it can exercise
will but it is strongest and most surprising of all in that immense
middle empire where europe as it were flows back to asia--namely in
russia there the power to will has been long stored up and accumulated
there the will--uncertain whether to be negative or affirmative--waits
threateningly to be discharged to borrow their pet phrase from our
physicists perhaps not only indian wars and complications in asia would
be necessary to free europe from its greatest danger but also internal
subversion the shattering of the empire into small states and above
all the introduction of parliamentary imbecility together with the
obligation of every one to read his newspaper at breakfast i do not
say this as one who desires it in my heart i should rather prefer the
contrary--i mean such an increase in the threatening attitude of
russia that europe would have to make up its mind to become equally
threatening--namely to acquire one will by means of a new caste to
rule over the continent a persistent dreadful will of its own that
can set its aims thousands of years ahead; so that the long spun-out
comedy of its petty-statism and its dynastic as well as its democratic
many-willed-ness might finally be brought to a close. the time for
petty politics is past; the next century will bring the struggle for the
dominion of the world--the compulsion to great politics.

. as to how far the new warlike age on which we europeans have
evidently entered may perhaps favour the growth of another and stronger
kind of skepticism i should like to express myself preliminarily
merely by a parable which the lovers of german history will already
understand. that unscrupulous enthusiast for big handsome grenadiers
who as king of prussia brought into being a military and skeptical
genius--and therewith in reality the new and now triumphantly emerged
type of german the problematic crazy father of frederick the great
had on one point the very knack and lucky grasp of the genius he knew
what was then lacking in germany the want of which was a hundred times
more alarming and serious than any lack of culture and social form--his
ill-will to the young frederick resulted from the anxiety of a profound
instinct. men were lacking; and he suspected to his bitterest regret
that his own son was not man enough. there however he deceived
himself; but who would not have deceived himself in his place he saw
his son lapsed to atheism to the esprit to the pleasant frivolity of
clever frenchmen--he saw in the background the great bloodsucker the
spider skepticism; he suspected the incurable wretchedness of a heart no
longer hard enough either for evil or good and of a broken will that no
longer commands is no longer able to command. meanwhile however
there grew up in his son that new kind of harder and more dangerous
skepticism--who knows to what extent it was encouraged just by
his fathers hatred and the icy melancholy of a will condemned to
solitude--the skepticism of daring manliness which is closely related
to the genius for war and conquest and made its first entrance into
germany in the person of the great frederick. this skepticism despises
and nevertheless grasps; it undermines and takes possession; it does
not believe but it does not thereby lose itself; it gives the spirit a
dangerous liberty but it keeps strict guard over the heart. it is the
german form of skepticism which as a continued fredericianism risen
to the highest spirituality has kept europe for a considerable time
under the dominion of the german spirit and its critical and historical
distrust owing to the insuperably strong and tough masculine character
of the great german philologists and historical critics who
rightly estimated were also all of them artists of destruction
and dissolution a new conception of the german spirit gradually
established itself--in spite of all romanticism in music and
philosophy--in which the leaning towards masculine skepticism was
decidedly prominent whether for instance as fearlessness of gaze as
courage and sternness of the dissecting hand or as resolute will to
dangerous voyages of discovery to spiritualized north pole expeditions
under barren and dangerous skies. there may be good grounds for it when
warm-blooded and superficial humanitarians cross themselves before this
spirit cet esprit fataliste ironique mephistophelique as michelet
calls it not without a shudder. but if one would realize how
characteristic is this fear of the man in the german spirit which
awakened europe out of its dogmatic slumber let us call to mind the
former conception which had to be overcome by this new one--and that
it is not so very long ago that a masculinized woman could dare with
unbridled presumption to recommend the germans to the interest of
europe as gentle good-hearted weak-willed and poetical fools.
finally let us only understand profoundly enough napoleons
astonishment when he saw goethe it reveals what had been regarded for
centuries as the german spirit voila un homme!--that was as much as
to say but this is a man! and i only expected to see a german!

. supposing then that in the picture of the philosophers of the
future some trait suggests the question whether they must not perhaps
be skeptics in the last-mentioned sense something in them would only be
designated thereby--and not they themselves. with equal right they might
call themselves critics and assuredly they will be men of experiments.
by the name with which i ventured to baptize them i have already
expressly emphasized their attempting and their love of attempting is
this because as critics in body and soul they will love to make use
of experiments in a new and perhaps wider and more dangerous sense in
their passion for knowledge will they have to go further in daring and
painful attempts than the sensitive and pampered taste of a democratic
century can approve of--there is no doubt these coming ones will be
least able to dispense with the serious and not unscrupulous qualities
which distinguish the critic from the skeptic i mean the certainty as to
standards of worth the conscious employment of a unity of method
the wary courage the standing-alone and the capacity for
self-responsibility indeed they will avow among themselves a delight
in denial and dissection and a certain considerate cruelty which knows
how to handle the knife surely and deftly even when the heart bleeds
they will be sterner and perhaps not always towards themselves only
than humane people may desire they will not deal with the truth in
order that it may please them or elevate and inspire them--they
will rather have little faith in truth bringing with it such revels
for the feelings. they will smile those rigorous spirits when any one
says in their presence that thought elevates me why should it not be
true or that work enchants me why should it not be beautiful or
that artist enlarges me why should he not be great perhaps they
will not only have a smile but a genuine disgust for all that is thus
rapturous idealistic feminine and hermaphroditic and if any one
could look into their inmost hearts he would not easily find therein
the intention to reconcile christian sentiments with antique taste
or even with modern parliamentarism the kind of reconciliation
necessarily found even among philosophers in our very uncertain and
consequently very conciliatory century. critical discipline and every
habit that conduces to purity and rigour in intellectual matters
will not only be demanded from themselves by these philosophers of
the future they may even make a display thereof as their special
adornment--nevertheless they will not want to be called critics on that
account. it will seem to them no small indignity to philosophy to
have it decreed as is so welcome nowadays that philosophy itself is
criticism and critical science--and nothing else whatever! though this
estimate of philosophy may enjoy the approval of all the positivists of
france and germany and possibly it even flattered the heart and taste
of kant let us call to mind the titles of his principal works our new
philosophers will say notwithstanding that critics are instruments of
the philosopher and just on that account as instruments they are
far from being philosophers themselves! even the great chinaman of
konigsberg was only a great critic.

. i insist upon it that people finally cease confounding
philosophical workers and in general scientific men with
philosophers--that precisely here one should strictly give each his
own and not give those far too much these far too little. it may
be necessary for the education of the real philosopher that he himself
should have once stood upon all those steps upon which his servants
the scientific workers of philosophy remain standing and must remain
standing he himself must perhaps have been critic and dogmatist
and historian and besides poet and collector and traveler and
riddle-reader and moralist and seer and free spirit and almost
everything in order to traverse the whole range of human values
and estimations and that he may be able with a variety of eyes and
consciences to look from a height to any distance from a depth up
to any height from a nook into any expanse. but all these are only
preliminary conditions for his task; this task itself demands something
else--it requires him to create values. the philosophical workers after
the excellent pattern of kant and hegel have to fix and formalize some
great existing body of valuations--that is to say former determinations
of value creations of value which have become prevalent and are for
a time called truths--whether in the domain of the logical the
political moral or the artistic. it is for these investigators to
make whatever has happened and been esteemed hitherto conspicuous
conceivable intelligible and manageable to shorten everything long
even time itself and to subjugate the entire past an immense and
wonderful task in the carrying out of which all refined pride all
tenacious will can surely find satisfaction. the real philosophers
however are commanders and law-givers; they say thus shall it be!
they determine first the whither and the why of mankind and thereby
set aside the previous labour of all philosophical workers and all
subjugators of the past--they grasp at the future with a creative
hand and whatever is and was becomes for them thereby a means an
instrument and a hammer. their knowing is creating their creating
is a law-giving their will to truth is--will to power.--are there at
present such philosophers have there ever been such philosophers must
there not be such philosophers some day ...

. it is always more obvious to me that the philosopher as a man
indispensable for the morrow and the day after the morrow has ever
found himself and has been obliged to find himself in contradiction
to the day in which he lives; his enemy has always been the ideal of his
day. hitherto all those extraordinary furtherers of humanity whom one
calls philosophers--who rarely regarded themselves as lovers of wisdom
but rather as disagreeable fools and dangerous interrogators--have found
their mission their hard involuntary imperative mission in the end
however the greatness of their mission in being the bad conscience of
their age. in putting the vivisectors knife to the breast of the very
virtues of their age they have betrayed their own secret; it has been
for the sake of a new greatness of man a new untrodden path to
his aggrandizement. they have always disclosed how much hypocrisy
indolence self-indulgence and self-neglect how much falsehood was
concealed under the most venerated types of contemporary morality how
much virtue was outlived they have always said we must remove hence to
where you are least at home in the face of a world of modern ideas
which would like to confine every one in a corner in a specialty a
philosopher if there could be philosophers nowadays would be compelled
to place the greatness of man the conception of greatness precisely
in his comprehensiveness and multifariousness in his all-roundness he
would even determine worth and rank according to the amount and variety
of that which a man could bear and take upon himself according to the
extent to which a man could stretch his responsibility nowadays the
taste and virtue of the age weaken and attenuate the will nothing is
so adapted to the spirit of the age as weakness of will consequently in
the ideal of the philosopher strength of will sternness and capacity
for prolonged resolution must specially be included in the conception
of greatness with as good a right as the opposite doctrine with its
ideal of a silly renouncing humble selfless humanity was suited to
an opposite age--such as the sixteenth century which suffered from its
accumulated energy of will and from the wildest torrents and floods
of selfishness in the time of socrates among men only of worn-out
instincts old conservative athenians who let themselves go--for the
sake of happiness as they said for the sake of pleasure as their
conduct indicated--and who had continually on their lips the old pompous
words to which they had long forfeited the right by the life they led
irony was perhaps necessary for greatness of soul the wicked socratic
assurance of the old physician and plebeian who cut ruthlessly into his
own flesh as into the flesh and heart of the noble with a look that
said plainly enough do not dissemble before me! here--we are equal!
at present on the contrary when throughout europe the herding-animal
alone attains to honours and dispenses honours when equality of
right can too readily be transformed into equality in wrong--i mean to
say into general war against everything rare strange and privileged
against the higher man the higher soul the higher duty the higher
responsibility the creative plenipotence and lordliness--at present
it belongs to the conception of greatness to be noble to wish to be
apart to be capable of being different to stand alone to have to live
by personal initiative and the philosopher will betray something of his
own ideal when he asserts he shall be the greatest who can be the most
solitary the most concealed the most divergent the man beyond good
and evil the master of his virtues and of super-abundance of will;
precisely this shall be called greatness as diversified as can be
entire as ample as can be full. and to ask once more the question is
greatness possible--nowadays

. it is difficult to learn what a philosopher is because it cannot
be taught one must know it by experience--or one should have the
pride not to know it. the fact that at present people all talk of things
of which they cannot have any experience is true more especially
and unfortunately as concerns the philosopher and philosophical
matters--the very few know them are permitted to know them and
all popular ideas about them are false. thus for instance the truly
philosophical combination of a bold exuberant spirituality which runs
at presto pace and a dialectic rigour and necessity which makes no
false step is unknown to most thinkers and scholars from their own
experience and therefore should any one speak of it in their
presence it is incredible to them. they conceive of every necessity as
troublesome as a painful compulsory obedience and state of constraint;
thinking itself is regarded by them as something slow and hesitating
almost as a trouble and often enough as worthy of the sweat of the
noble--but not at all as something easy and divine closely related
to dancing and exuberance! to think and to take a matter seriously
arduously--that is one and the same thing to them; such only has been
their experience.--artists have here perhaps a finer intuition; they
who know only too well that precisely when they no longer do anything
arbitrarily and everything of necessity their feeling of freedom
of subtlety of power of creatively fixing disposing and shaping
reaches its climax--in short that necessity and freedom of will are
then the same thing with them. there is in fine a gradation of rank
in psychical states to which the gradation of rank in the problems
corresponds; and the highest problems repel ruthlessly every one who
ventures too near them without being predestined for their solution
by the loftiness and power of his spirituality. of what use is it for
nimble everyday intellects or clumsy honest mechanics and empiricists
to press in their plebeian ambition close to such problems and as
it were into this holy of holies--as so often happens nowadays! but
coarse feet must never tread upon such carpets this is provided for in
the primary law of things; the doors remain closed to those intruders
though they may dash and break their heads thereon. people have always
to be born to a high station or more definitely they have to be bred
for it a person has only a right to philosophy--taking the word in
its higher significance--in virtue of his descent; the ancestors the
blood decide here also. many generations must have prepared the way
for the coming of the philosopher; each of his virtues must have been
separately acquired nurtured transmitted and embodied; not only the
bold easy delicate course and current of his thoughts but above all
the readiness for great responsibilities the majesty of ruling glance
and contemning look the feeling of separation from the multitude with
their duties and virtues the kindly patronage and defense of whatever
is misunderstood and calumniated be it god or devil the delight and
practice of supreme justice the art of commanding the amplitude of
will the lingering eye which rarely admires rarely looks up rarely
loves....



chapter vii. our virtues


. our virtues--it is probable that we too have still our virtues
although naturally they are not those sincere and massive virtues on
account of which we hold our grandfathers in esteem and also at a little
distance from us. we europeans of the day after tomorrow we firstlings
of the twentieth century--with all our dangerous curiosity our
multifariousness and art of disguising our mellow and seemingly
sweetened cruelty in sense and spirit--we shall presumably if we must
have virtues have those only which have come to agreement with our most
secret and heartfelt inclinations with our most ardent requirements
well then let us look for them in our labyrinths!--where as we know
so many things lose themselves so many things get quite lost! and is
there anything finer than to search for ones own virtues is it not
almost to believe in ones own virtues but this believing in ones
own virtues--is it not practically the same as what was formerly called
ones good conscience that long respectable pigtail of an idea
which our grandfathers used to hang behind their heads and often enough
also behind their understandings it seems therefore that however
little we may imagine ourselves to be old-fashioned and grandfatherly
respectable in other respects in one thing we are nevertheless the
worthy grandchildren of our grandfathers we last europeans with good
consciences we also still wear their pigtail.--ah! if you only knew how
soon so very soon--it will be different!

. as in the stellar firmament there are sometimes two suns which
determine the path of one planet and in certain cases suns of different
colours shine around a single planet now with red light now with
green and then simultaneously illumine and flood it with motley
colours so we modern men owing to the complicated mechanism of our
firmament are determined by different moralities; our actions shine
alternately in different colours and are seldom unequivocal--and there
are often cases also in which our actions are motley-coloured.

. to love ones enemies i think that has been well learnt it takes
place thousands of times at present on a large and small scale; indeed
at times the higher and sublimer thing takes place--we learn to despise
when we love and precisely when we love best; all of it however
unconsciously without noise without ostentation with the shame and
secrecy of goodness which forbids the utterance of the pompous word
and the formula of virtue. morality as attitude--is opposed to our taste
nowadays. this is also an advance as it was an advance in our fathers
that religion as an attitude finally became opposed to their taste
including the enmity and voltairean bitterness against religion and all
that formerly belonged to freethinker-pantomime. it is the music in our
conscience the dance in our spirit to which puritan litanies moral
sermons and goody-goodness wont chime.

. let us be careful in dealing with those who attach great importance
to being credited with moral tact and subtlety in moral discernment!
they never forgive us if they have once made a mistake before us
or even with regard to us--they inevitably become our instinctive
calumniators and detractors even when they still remain our
friends.--blessed are the forgetful for they get the better even of
their blunders.

. the psychologists of france--and where else are there still
psychologists nowadays--have never yet exhausted their bitter and
manifold enjoyment of the betise bourgeoise just as though... in
short they betray something thereby. flaubert for instance the honest
citizen of rouen neither saw heard nor tasted anything else in the
end; it was his mode of self-torment and refined cruelty. as this is
growing wearisome i would now recommend for a change something else
for a pleasure--namely the unconscious astuteness with which good fat
honest mediocrity always behaves towards loftier spirits and the tasks
they have to perform the subtle barbed jesuitical astuteness which
is a thousand times subtler than the taste and understanding of the
middle-class in its best moments--subtler even than the understanding of
its victims--a repeated proof that instinct is the most intelligent
of all kinds of intelligence which have hitherto been discovered. in
short you psychologists study the philosophy of the rule in its
struggle with the exception there you have a spectacle fit for gods
and godlike malignity! or in plainer words practise vivisection on
good people on the homo bonae voluntatis on yourselves!

. the practice of judging and condemning morally is the favourite
revenge of the intellectually shallow on those who are less so it is
also a kind of indemnity for their being badly endowed by nature
and finally it is an opportunity for acquiring spirit and becoming
subtle--malice spiritualises. they are glad in their inmost heart that
there is a standard according to which those who are over-endowed with
intellectual goods and privileges are equal to them they contend for
the equality of all before god and almost need the belief in god for
this purpose. it is among them that the most powerful antagonists of
atheism are found. if any one were to say to them a lofty spirituality
is beyond all comparison with the honesty and respectability of a merely
moral man--it would make them furious i shall take care not to say
so. i would rather flatter them with my theory that lofty spirituality
itself exists only as the ultimate product of moral qualities that it
is a synthesis of all qualities attributed to the merely moral man
after they have been acquired singly through long training and practice
perhaps during a whole series of generations that lofty spirituality
is precisely the spiritualising of justice and the beneficent severity
which knows that it is authorized to maintain gradations of rank in the
world even among things--and not only among men.

. now that the praise of the disinterested person is so popular
one must--probably not without some danger--get an idea of what people
actually take an interest in and what are the things generally which
fundamentally and profoundly concern ordinary men--including the
cultured even the learned and perhaps philosophers also if
appearances do not deceive. the fact thereby becomes obvious that the
greater part of what interests and charms higher natures and more
refined and fastidious tastes seems absolutely uninteresting to
the average man--if notwithstanding he perceive devotion to these
interests he calls it desinteresse and wonders how it is possible to
act disinterestedly. there have been philosophers who could give this
popular astonishment a seductive and mystical other-worldly expression
perhaps because they did not know the higher nature by experience
instead of stating the naked and candidly reasonable truth that
disinterested action is very interesting and interested action
provided that... and love--what! even an action for loves sake
shall be unegoistic but you fools--! and the praise of the
self-sacrificer--but whoever has really offered sacrifice knows that
he wanted and obtained something for it--perhaps something from himself
for something from himself; that he relinquished here in order to have
more there perhaps in general to be more or even feel himself more.
but this is a realm of questions and answers in which a more fastidious
spirit does not like to stay for here truth has to stifle her yawns so
much when she is obliged to answer. and after all truth is a woman; one
must not use force with her.

. it sometimes happens said a moralistic pedant and
trifle-retailer that i honour and respect an unselfish man not
however because he is unselfish but because i think he has a right to
be useful to another man at his own expense. in short the question
is always who he is and who the other is. for instance in a person
created and destined for command self-denial and modest retirement
instead of being virtues would be the waste of virtues so it seems
to me. every system of unegoistic morality which takes itself
unconditionally and appeals to every one not only sins against good
taste but is also an incentive to sins of omission an additional
seduction under the mask of philanthropy--and precisely a seduction and
injury to the higher rarer and more privileged types of men. moral
systems must be compelled first of all to bow before the gradations of
rank; their presumption must be driven home to their conscience--until
they thoroughly understand at last that it is immoral to say that what
is right for one is proper for another.--so said my moralistic pedant
and bonhomme. did he perhaps deserve to be laughed at when he thus
exhorted systems of morals to practise morality but one should not be
too much in the right if one wishes to have the laughers on ones own
side; a grain of wrong pertains even to good taste.

. wherever sympathy fellow-suffering is preached nowadays--and
if i gather rightly no other religion is any longer preached--let the
psychologist have his ears open through all the vanity through all the
noise which is natural to these preachers as to all preachers he will
hear a hoarse groaning genuine note of self-contempt. it belongs
to the overshadowing and uglifying of europe which has been on
the increase for a century the first symptoms of which are already
specified documentarily in a thoughtful letter of galiani to madame
depinay--if it is not really the cause thereof! the man of
modern ideas the conceited ape is excessively dissatisfied with
himself--this is perfectly certain. he suffers and his vanity wants him
only to suffer with his fellows.

. the hybrid european--a tolerably ugly plebeian taken all in
all--absolutely requires a costume he needs history as a storeroom
of costumes. to be sure he notices that none of the costumes fit him
properly--he changes and changes. let us look at the nineteenth century
with respect to these hasty preferences and changes in its masquerades
of style and also with respect to its moments of desperation on account
of nothing suiting us. it is in vain to get ourselves up as romantic
or classical or christian or florentine or barocco or national
in moribus et artibus it does not clothe us! but the spirit
especially the historical spirit profits even by this desperation
once and again a new sample of the past or of the foreign is tested
put on taken off packed up and above all studied--we are the first
studious age in puncto of costumes i mean as concerns morals
articles of belief artistic tastes and religions; we are prepared as
no other age has ever been for a carnival in the grand style for the
most spiritual festival--laughter and arrogance for the transcendental
height of supreme folly and aristophanic ridicule of the world. perhaps
we are still discovering the domain of our invention just here the
domain where even we can still be original probably as parodists of
the worlds history and as gods merry-andrews--perhaps though nothing
else of the present have a future our laughter itself may have a
future!

. the historical sense or the capacity for divining quickly
the order of rank of the valuations according to which a people a
community or an individual has lived the divining instinct for the
relationships of these valuations for the relation of the authority
of the valuations to the authority of the operating forces--this
historical sense which we europeans claim as our specialty has come
to us in the train of the enchanting and mad semi-barbarity into which
europe has been plunged by the democratic mingling of classes and
races--it is only the nineteenth century that has recognized this
faculty as its sixth sense. owing to this mingling the past of every
form and mode of life and of cultures which were formerly closely
contiguous and superimposed on one another flows forth into us modern
souls; our instincts now run back in all directions we ourselves are
a kind of chaos in the end as we have said the spirit perceives its
advantage therein. by means of our semi-barbarity in body and in desire
we have secret access everywhere such as a noble age never had; we have
access above all to the labyrinth of imperfect civilizations and to
every form of semi-barbarity that has at any time existed on earth; and
in so far as the most considerable part of human civilization hitherto
has just been semi-barbarity the historical sense implies almost the
sense and instinct for everything the taste and tongue for everything
whereby it immediately proves itself to be an ignoble sense. for
instance we enjoy homer once more it is perhaps our happiest
acquisition that we know how to appreciate homer whom men of
distinguished culture as the french of the seventeenth century like
saint-evremond who reproached him for his esprit vaste and even
voltaire the last echo of the century cannot and could not so easily
appropriate--whom they scarcely permitted themselves to enjoy. the very
decided yea and nay of their palate their promptly ready disgust their
hesitating reluctance with regard to everything strange their horror of
the bad taste even of lively curiosity and in general the averseness of
every distinguished and self-sufficing culture to avow a new desire
a dissatisfaction with its own condition or an admiration of what is
strange all this determines and disposes them unfavourably even towards
the best things of the world which are not their property or could not
become their prey--and no faculty is more unintelligible to such men
than just this historical sense with its truckling plebeian
curiosity. the case is not different with shakespeare that marvelous
spanish-moorish-saxon synthesis of taste over whom an ancient athenian
of the circle of aeschylus would have half-killed himself with laughter
or irritation but we--accept precisely this wild motleyness this
medley of the most delicate the most coarse and the most artificial
with a secret confidence and cordiality; we enjoy it as a refinement
of art reserved expressly for us and allow ourselves to be as little
disturbed by the repulsive fumes and the proximity of the english
populace in which shakespeares art and taste lives as perhaps on
the chiaja of naples where with all our senses awake we go our way
enchanted and voluntarily in spite of the drain-odour of the lower
quarters of the town. that as men of the historical sense we have
our virtues is not to be disputed--we are unpretentious unselfish
modest brave habituated to self-control and self-renunciation very
grateful very patient very complaisant--but with all this we are
perhaps not very tasteful. let us finally confess it that what is
most difficult for us men of the historical sense to grasp feel
taste and love what finds us fundamentally prejudiced and almost
hostile is precisely the perfection and ultimate maturity in every
culture and art the essentially noble in works and men their moment
of smooth sea and halcyon self-sufficiency the goldenness and coldness
which all things show that have perfected themselves. perhaps our great
virtue of the historical sense is in necessary contrast to good taste
at least to the very bad taste; and we can only evoke in ourselves
imperfectly hesitatingly and with compulsion the small short and
happy godsends and glorifications of human life as they shine here and
there those moments and marvelous experiences when a great power has
voluntarily come to a halt before the boundless and infinite--when a
super-abundance of refined delight has been enjoyed by a sudden checking
and petrifying by standing firmly and planting oneself fixedly on still
trembling ground. proportionateness is strange to us let us confess it
to ourselves; our itching is really the itching for the infinite the
immeasurable. like the rider on his forward panting horse we let the
reins fall before the infinite we modern men we semi-barbarians--and
are only in our highest bliss when we--are in most danger.

. whether it be hedonism pessimism utilitarianism or eudaemonism
all those modes of thinking which measure the worth of things according
to pleasure and pain that is according to accompanying circumstances
and secondary considerations are plausible modes of thought and
naivetes which every one conscious of creative powers and an artists
conscience will look down upon with scorn though not without sympathy.
sympathy for you!--to be sure that is not sympathy as you understand
it it is not sympathy for social distress for society with its
sick and misfortuned for the hereditarily vicious and defective who lie
on the ground around us; still less is it sympathy for the grumbling
vexed revolutionary slave-classes who strive after power--they call it
freedom. our sympathy is a loftier and further-sighted sympathy--we
see how man dwarfs himself how you dwarf him! and there are moments
when we view your sympathy with an indescribable anguish when we resist
it--when we regard your seriousness as more dangerous than any kind
of levity. you want if possible--and there is not a more foolish if
possible--to do away with suffering; and we--it really seems that we
would rather have it increased and made worse than it has ever been!
well-being as you understand it--is certainly not a goal; it seems
to us an end; a condition which at once renders man ludicrous and
contemptible--and makes his destruction desirable! the discipline
of suffering of great suffering--know ye not that it is only this
discipline that has produced all the elevations of humanity hitherto
the tension of soul in misfortune which communicates to it its energy
its shuddering in view of rack and ruin its inventiveness and bravery
in undergoing enduring interpreting and exploiting misfortune and
whatever depth mystery disguise spirit artifice or greatness has
been bestowed upon the soul--has it not been bestowed through suffering
through the discipline of great suffering in man creature and creator
are united in man there is not only matter shred excess clay mire
folly chaos; but there is also the creator the sculptor the hardness
of the hammer the divinity of the spectator and the seventh day--do
ye understand this contrast and that your sympathy for the creature
in man applies to that which has to be fashioned bruised forged
stretched roasted annealed refined--to that which must necessarily
suffer and is meant to suffer and our sympathy--do ye not understand
what our reverse sympathy applies to when it resists your sympathy as
the worst of all pampering and enervation--so it is sympathy against
sympathy!--but to repeat it once more there are higher problems than
the problems of pleasure and pain and sympathy; and all systems of
philosophy which deal only with these are naivetes.

. we immoralists.--this world with which we are concerned in which
we have to fear and love this almost invisible inaudible world of
delicate command and delicate obedience a world of almost in every
respect captious insidious sharp and tender--yes it is well
protected from clumsy spectators and familiar curiosity! we are
woven into a strong net and garment of duties and cannot disengage
ourselves--precisely here we are men of duty even we! occasionally
it is true we dance in our chains and betwixt our swords; it
is none the less true that more often we gnash our teeth under the
circumstances and are impatient at the secret hardship of our lot. but
do what we will fools and appearances say of us these are men without
duty--we have always fools and appearances against us!

. honesty granting that it is the virtue of which we cannot rid
ourselves we free spirits--well we will labour at it with all our
perversity and love and not tire of perfecting ourselves in our
virtue which alone remains may its glance some day overspread like
a gilded blue mocking twilight this aging civilization with its dull
gloomy seriousness! and if nevertheless our honesty should one day
grow weary and sigh and stretch its limbs and find us too hard and
would fain have it pleasanter easier and gentler like an agreeable
vice let us remain hard we latest stoics and let us send to its
help whatever devilry we have in us--our disgust at the clumsy
and undefined our nitimur in vetitum our love of adventure
our sharpened and fastidious curiosity our most subtle disguised
intellectual will to power and universal conquest which rambles and
roves avidiously around all the realms of the future--let us go with all
our devils to the help of our god! it is probable that people will
misunderstand and mistake us on that account what does it matter! they
will say their honesty--that is their devilry and nothing else!
what does it matter! and even if they were right--have not all gods
hitherto been such sanctified re-baptized devils and after all what
do we know of ourselves and what the spirit that leads us wants to be
called it is a question of names. and how many spirits we harbour
our honesty we free spirits--let us be careful lest it become our
vanity our ornament and ostentation our limitation our stupidity!
every virtue inclines to stupidity every stupidity to virtue; stupid
to the point of sanctity they say in russia--let us be careful lest
out of pure honesty we eventually become saints and bores! is not life
a hundred times too short for us--to bore ourselves one would have to
believe in eternal life in order to...

. i hope to be forgiven for discovering that all moral philosophy
hitherto has been tedious and has belonged to the soporific
appliances--and that virtue in my opinion has been more injured
by the tediousness of its advocates than by anything else; at the same
time however i would not wish to overlook their general usefulness. it
is desirable that as few people as possible should reflect upon morals
and consequently it is very desirable that morals should not some day
become interesting! but let us not be afraid! things still remain today
as they have always been i see no one in europe who has or discloses
an idea of the fact that philosophizing concerning morals might be
conducted in a dangerous captious and ensnaring manner--that calamity
might be involved therein. observe for example the indefatigable
inevitable english utilitarians how ponderously and respectably they
stalk on stalk along a homeric metaphor expresses it better in the
footsteps of bentham just as he had already stalked in the footsteps of
the respectable helvetius! no he was not a dangerous man helvetius
ce senateur pococurante to use an expression of galiani. no new
thought nothing of the nature of a finer turning or better expression
of an old thought not even a proper history of what has been previously
thought on the subject an impossible literature taking it all in all
unless one knows how to leaven it with some mischief. in effect the
old english vice called cant which is moral tartuffism has insinuated
itself also into these moralists whom one must certainly read with an
eye to their motives if one must read them concealed this time under
the new form of the scientific spirit; moreover there is not absent
from them a secret struggle with the pangs of conscience from which a
race of former puritans must naturally suffer in all their scientific
tinkering with morals. is not a moralist the opposite of a puritan
that is to say as a thinker who regards morality as questionable
as worthy of interrogation in short as a problem is moralizing
not-immoral in the end they all want english morality to be
recognized as authoritative inasmuch as mankind or the general
utility or the happiness of the greatest number--no! the happiness
of england will be best served thereby. they would like by all means
to convince themselves that the striving after english happiness i
mean after comfort and fashion and in the highest instance a seat in
parliament is at the same time the true path of virtue; in fact that
in so far as there has been virtue in the world hitherto it has
just consisted in such striving. not one of those ponderous
conscience-stricken herding-animals who undertake to advocate the
cause of egoism as conducive to the general welfare wants to have
any knowledge or inkling of the facts that the general welfare is
no ideal no goal no notion that can be at all grasped but is only a
nostrum--that what is fair to one may not at all be fair to another
that the requirement of one morality for all is really a detriment to
higher men in short that there is a distinction of rank between man
and man and consequently between morality and morality. they are an
unassuming and fundamentally mediocre species of men these utilitarian
englishmen and as already remarked in so far as they are tedious one
cannot think highly enough of their utility. one ought even to encourage
them as has been partially attempted in the following rhymes--

    hail ye worthies barrow-wheeling
    longer--better aye revealing

    stiffer aye in head and knee;
    unenraptured never jesting
    mediocre everlasting

    sans genie et sans esprit!


. in these later ages which may be proud of their humanity there
still remains so much fear so much superstition of the fear of the
cruel wild beast the mastering of which constitutes the very pride of
these humaner ages--that even obvious truths as if by the agreement
of centuries have long remained unuttered because they have the
appearance of helping the finally slain wild beast back to life again.
i perhaps risk something when i allow such a truth to escape; let
others capture it again and give it so much milk of pious sentiment
footnote an expression from schillers william tell act iv scene
. to drink that it will lie down quiet and forgotten in its old
corner.--one ought to learn anew about cruelty and open ones eyes;
one ought at last to learn impatience in order that such immodest
gross errors--as for instance have been fostered by ancient and
modern philosophers with regard to tragedy--may no longer wander about
virtuously and boldly. almost everything that we call higher culture
is based upon the spiritualising and intensifying of cruelty--this is
my thesis; the wild beast has not been slain at all it lives it
flourishes it has only been--transfigured. that which constitutes the
painful delight of tragedy is cruelty; that which operates agreeably in
so-called tragic sympathy and at the basis even of everything sublime
up to the highest and most delicate thrills of metaphysics obtains its
sweetness solely from the intermingled ingredient of cruelty. what the
roman enjoys in the arena the christian in the ecstasies of the cross
the spaniard at the sight of the faggot and stake or of the bull-fight
the present-day japanese who presses his way to the tragedy the workman
of the parisian suburbs who has a homesickness for bloody revolutions
the wagnerienne who with unhinged will undergoes the performance of
tristan and isolde--what all these enjoy and strive with mysterious
ardour to drink in is the philtre of the great circe cruelty. here
to be sure we must put aside entirely the blundering psychology of
former times which could only teach with regard to cruelty that
it originated at the sight of the suffering of others there is an
abundant super-abundant enjoyment even in ones own suffering in
causing ones own suffering--and wherever man has allowed himself to be
persuaded to self-denial in the religious sense or to self-mutilation
as among the phoenicians and ascetics or in general to
desensualisation decarnalisation and contrition to puritanical
repentance-spasms to vivisection of conscience and to pascal-like
sacrifizia dell intelleto he is secretly allured and impelled
forwards by his cruelty by the dangerous thrill of cruelty towards
himself.--finally let us consider that even the seeker of knowledge
operates as an artist and glorifier of cruelty in that he compels his
spirit to perceive against its own inclination and often enough against
the wishes of his heart--he forces it to say nay where he would like
to affirm love and adore; indeed every instance of taking a thing
profoundly and fundamentally is a violation an intentional injuring
of the fundamental will of the spirit which instinctively aims at
appearance and superficiality--even in every desire for knowledge there
is a drop of cruelty.

. perhaps what i have said here about a fundamental will of the
spirit may not be understood without further details; i may be allowed
a word of explanation.--that imperious something which is popularly
called the spirit wishes to be master internally and externally
and to feel itself master; it has the will of a multiplicity for a
simplicity a binding taming imperious and essentially ruling will.
its requirements and capacities here are the same as those assigned by
physiologists to everything that lives grows and multiplies. the power
of the spirit to appropriate foreign elements reveals itself in a strong
tendency to assimilate the new to the old to simplify the manifold
to overlook or repudiate the absolutely contradictory; just as it
arbitrarily re-underlines makes prominent and falsifies for itself
certain traits and lines in the foreign elements in every portion of
the outside world. its object thereby is the incorporation of new
experiences the assortment of new things in the old arrangements--in
short growth; or more properly the feeling of growth the feeling of
increased power--is its object. this same will has at its service an
apparently opposed impulse of the spirit a suddenly adopted preference
of ignorance of arbitrary shutting out a closing of windows an inner
denial of this or that a prohibition to approach a sort of defensive
attitude against much that is knowable a contentment with obscurity
with the shutting-in horizon an acceptance and approval of ignorance
as that which is all necessary according to the degree of its
appropriating power its digestive power to speak figuratively and
in fact the spirit resembles a stomach more than anything else. here
also belong an occasional propensity of the spirit to let itself be
deceived perhaps with a waggish suspicion that it is not so and so
but is only allowed to pass as such a delight in uncertainty and
ambiguity an exulting enjoyment of arbitrary out-of-the-way narrowness
and mystery of the too-near of the foreground of the magnified
the diminished the misshapen the beautified--an enjoyment of the
arbitrariness of all these manifestations of power. finally in this
connection there is the not unscrupulous readiness of the spirit to
deceive other spirits and dissemble before them--the constant pressing
and straining of a creating shaping changeable power the spirit
enjoys therein its craftiness and its variety of disguises it enjoys
also its feeling of security therein--it is precisely by its protean
arts that it is best protected and concealed!--counter to this
propensity for appearance for simplification for a disguise for a
cloak in short for an outside--for every outside is a cloak--there
operates the sublime tendency of the man of knowledge which takes and
insists on taking things profoundly variously and thoroughly; as a
kind of cruelty of the intellectual conscience and taste which every
courageous thinker will acknowledge in himself provided as it ought
to be that he has sharpened and hardened his eye sufficiently long for
introspection and is accustomed to severe discipline and even severe
words. he will say there is something cruel in the tendency of my
spirit let the virtuous and amiable try to convince him that it is not
so! in fact it would sound nicer if instead of our cruelty perhaps
our extravagant honesty were talked about whispered about and
glorified--we free very free spirits--and some day perhaps such will
actually be our--posthumous glory! meanwhile--for there is plenty of
time until then--we should be least inclined to deck ourselves out in
such florid and fringed moral verbiage; our whole former work has
just made us sick of this taste and its sprightly exuberance. they are
beautiful glistening jingling festive words honesty love of truth
love of wisdom sacrifice for knowledge heroism of the truthful--there
is something in them that makes ones heart swell with pride. but we
anchorites and marmots have long ago persuaded ourselves in all the
secrecy of an anchorites conscience that this worthy parade of
verbiage also belongs to the old false adornment frippery and
gold-dust of unconscious human vanity and that even under such
flattering colour and repainting the terrible original text homo natura
must again be recognized. in effect to translate man back again into
nature; to master the many vain and visionary interpretations and
subordinate meanings which have hitherto been scratched and daubed over
the eternal original text homo natura; to bring it about that man shall
henceforth stand before man as he now hardened by the discipline
of science stands before the other forms of nature with fearless
oedipus-eyes and stopped ulysses-ears deaf to the enticements of old
metaphysical bird-catchers who have piped to him far too long thou
art more! thou art higher! thou hast a different origin!--this may be
a strange and foolish task but that it is a task who can deny! why did
we choose it this foolish task or to put the question differently
why knowledge at all every one will ask us about this. and thus
pressed we who have asked ourselves the question a hundred times have
not found and cannot find any better answer....

. learning alters us it does what all nourishment does that does not
merely conserve--as the physiologist knows. but at the bottom of our
souls quite down below there is certainly something unteachable
a granite of spiritual fate of predetermined decision and answer to
predetermined chosen questions. in each cardinal problem there speaks
an unchangeable i am this; a thinker cannot learn anew about man and
woman for instance but can only learn fully--he can only follow to the
end what is fixed about them in himself. occasionally we find certain
solutions of problems which make strong beliefs for us; perhaps they
are henceforth called convictions. later on--one sees in them only
footsteps to self-knowledge guide-posts to the problem which we
ourselves are--or more correctly to the great stupidity which we embody
our spiritual fate the unteachable in us quite down below.--in view
of this liberal compliment which i have just paid myself permission
will perhaps be more readily allowed me to utter some truths about
woman as she is provided that it is known at the outset how literally
they are merely--my truths.

. woman wishes to be independent and therefore she begins to
enlighten men about woman as she is--this is one of the worst
developments of the general uglifying of europe. for what must these
clumsy attempts of feminine scientificality and self-exposure bring
to light! woman has so much cause for shame; in woman there is so
much pedantry superficiality schoolmasterliness petty presumption
unbridledness and indiscretion concealed--study only womans behaviour
towards children!--which has really been best restrained and dominated
hitherto by the fear of man. alas if ever the eternally tedious in
woman--she has plenty of it!--is allowed to venture forth! if she
begins radically and on principle to unlearn her wisdom and art-of
charming of playing of frightening away sorrow of alleviating and
taking easily; if she forgets her delicate aptitude for agreeable
desires! female voices are already raised which by saint aristophanes!
make one afraid--with medical explicitness it is stated in a
threatening manner what woman first and last requires from man. is
it not in the very worst taste that woman thus sets herself up to be
scientific enlightenment hitherto has fortunately been mens affair
mens gift--we remained therewith among ourselves; and in the end
in view of all that women write about woman we may well have
considerable doubt as to whether woman really desires enlightenment
about herself--and can desire it. if woman does not thereby seek a new
ornament for herself--i believe ornamentation belongs to the eternally
feminine--why then she wishes to make herself feared perhaps she
thereby wishes to get the mastery. but she does not want truth--what
does woman care for truth from the very first nothing is more foreign
more repugnant or more hostile to woman than truth--her great art is
falsehood her chief concern is appearance and beauty. let us confess
it we men we honour and love this very art and this very instinct in
woman we who have the hard task and for our recreation gladly seek the
company of beings under whose hands glances and delicate follies our
seriousness our gravity and profundity appear almost like follies to
us. finally i ask the question did a woman herself ever acknowledge
profundity in a womans mind or justice in a womans heart and is it
not true that on the whole woman has hitherto been most despised by
woman herself and not at all by us--we men desire that woman should
not continue to compromise herself by enlightening us; just as it was
mans care and the consideration for woman when the church decreed
mulier taceat in ecclesia. it was to the benefit of woman when napoleon
gave the too eloquent madame de stael to understand mulier taceat in
politicis!--and in my opinion he is a true friend of woman who calls
out to women today mulier taceat de mulierel.

. it betrays corruption of the instincts--apart from the fact that
it betrays bad taste--when a woman refers to madame roland or madame de
stael or monsieur george sand as though something were proved thereby
in favour of woman as she is. among men these are the three comical
women as they are--nothing more!--and just the best involuntary
counter-arguments against feminine emancipation and autonomy.

. stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the terrible
thoughtlessness with which the feeding of the family and the master of
the house is managed! woman does not understand what food means and she
insists on being cook! if woman had been a thinking creature she should
certainly as cook for thousands of years have discovered the most
important physiological facts and should likewise have got possession
of the healing art! through bad female cooks--through the entire lack
of reason in the kitchen--the development of mankind has been longest
retarded and most interfered with even today matters are very little
better. a word to high school girls.

. there are turns and casts of fancy there are sentences little
handfuls of words in which a whole culture a whole society suddenly
crystallises itself. among these is the incidental remark of madame de
lambert to her son mon ami ne vous permettez jamais que des folies
qui vous feront grand plaisir--the motherliest and wisest remark by
the way that was ever addressed to a son.

. i have no doubt that every noble woman will oppose what dante and
goethe believed about woman--the former when he sang ella guardava
suso ed io in lei and the latter when he interpreted it the
eternally feminine draws us aloft; for this is just what she believes
of the eternally masculine.

.

seven apophthegms for women

how the longest ennui flees when a man comes to our knees!

age alas! and science staid furnish even weak virtue aid.

sombre garb and silence meet dress for every dame--discreet.

whom i thank when in my bliss god!--and my good tailoress!

young a flower-decked cavern home; old a dragon thence doth roam.

noble title leg thats fine man as well oh were he mine!

speech in brief and sense in mass--slippery for the jenny-ass!

a. woman has hitherto been treated by men like birds which losing
their way have come down among them from an elevation as something
delicate fragile wild strange sweet and animating--but as something
also which must be cooped up to prevent it flying away.

. to be mistaken in the fundamental problem of man and woman to
deny here the profoundest antagonism and the necessity for an eternally
hostile tension to dream here perhaps of equal rights equal
training equal claims and obligations that is a typical sign of
shallow-mindedness; and a thinker who has proved himself shallow at
this dangerous spot--shallow in instinct!--may generally be regarded as
suspicious nay more as betrayed as discovered; he will probably prove
too short for all fundamental questions of life future as well as
present and will be unable to descend into any of the depths. on the
other hand a man who has depth of spirit as well as of desires and
has also the depth of benevolence which is capable of severity and
harshness and easily confounded with them can only think of woman as
orientals do he must conceive of her as a possession as confinable
property as a being predestined for service and accomplishing her
mission therein--he must take his stand in this matter upon the immense
rationality of asia upon the superiority of the instinct of asia as
the greeks did formerly; those best heirs and scholars of asia--who
as is well known with their increasing culture and amplitude of power
from homer to the time of pericles became gradually stricter towards
woman in short more oriental. how necessary how logical even how
humanely desirable this was let us consider for ourselves!

. the weaker sex has in no previous age been treated with so
much respect by men as at present--this belongs to the tendency and
fundamental taste of democracy in the same way as disrespectfulness to
old age--what wonder is it that abuse should be immediately made of
this respect they want more they learn to make claims the tribute
of respect is at last felt to be well-nigh galling; rivalry for rights
indeed actual strife itself would be preferred in a word woman is
losing modesty. and let us immediately add that she is also losing
taste. she is unlearning to fear man but the woman who unlearns to
fear sacrifices her most womanly instincts. that woman should venture
forward when the fear-inspiring quality in man--or more definitely
the man in man--is no longer either desired or fully developed is
reasonable enough and also intelligible enough; what is more difficult
to understand is that precisely thereby--woman deteriorates. this is
what is happening nowadays let us not deceive ourselves about it!
wherever the industrial spirit has triumphed over the military
and aristocratic spirit woman strives for the economic and legal
independence of a clerk woman as clerkess is inscribed on the portal
of the modern society which is in course of formation. while she
thus appropriates new rights aspires to be master and inscribes
progress of woman on her flags and banners the very opposite realises
itself with terrible obviousness woman retrogrades. since the french
revolution the influence of woman in europe has declined in proportion
as she has increased her rights and claims; and the emancipation of
woman insofar as it is desired and demanded by women themselves and
not only by masculine shallow-pates thus proves to be a remarkable
symptom of the increased weakening and deadening of the most womanly
instincts. there is stupidity in this movement an almost masculine
stupidity of which a well-reared woman--who is always a sensible
woman--might be heartily ashamed. to lose the intuition as to the ground
upon which she can most surely achieve victory; to neglect exercise in
the use of her proper weapons; to let-herself-go before man perhaps
even to the book where formerly she kept herself in control and in
refined artful humility; to neutralize with her virtuous audacity mans
faith in a veiled fundamentally different ideal in woman something
eternally necessarily feminine; to emphatically and loquaciously
dissuade man from the idea that woman must be preserved cared for
protected and indulged like some delicate strangely wild and
often pleasant domestic animal; the clumsy and indignant collection of
everything of the nature of servitude and bondage which the position of
woman in the hitherto existing order of society has entailed and still
entails as though slavery were a counter-argument and not rather a
condition of every higher culture of every elevation of culture--what
does all this betoken if not a disintegration of womanly instincts
a defeminising certainly there are enough of idiotic friends and
corrupters of woman among the learned asses of the masculine sex who
advise woman to defeminize herself in this manner and to imitate
all the stupidities from which man in europe european manliness
suffers--who would like to lower woman to general culture indeed
even to newspaper reading and meddling with politics. here and there
they wish even to make women into free spirits and literary workers as
though a woman without piety would not be something perfectly obnoxious
or ludicrous to a profound and godless man;--almost everywhere her
nerves are being ruined by the most morbid and dangerous kind of music
our latest german music and she is daily being made more hysterical
and more incapable of fulfilling her first and last function that of
bearing robust children. they wish to cultivate her in general still
more and intend as they say to make the weaker sex strong by
culture as if history did not teach in the most emphatic manner that
the cultivating of mankind and his weakening--that is to say the
weakening dissipating and languishing of his force of will--have
always kept pace with one another and that the most powerful and
influential women in the world and lastly the mother of napoleon
had just to thank their force of will--and not their schoolmasters--for
their power and ascendancy over men. that which inspires respect
in woman and often enough fear also is her nature which is more
natural than that of man her genuine carnivora-like cunning
flexibility her tiger-claws beneath the glove her naivete in egoism
her untrainableness and innate wildness the incomprehensibleness
extent and deviation of her desires and virtues. that which in spite
of fear excites ones sympathy for the dangerous and beautiful cat
woman is that she seems more afflicted more vulnerable more
necessitous of love and more condemned to disillusionment than any
other creature. fear and sympathy it is with these feelings that man has
hitherto stood in the presence of woman always with one foot already in
tragedy which rends while it delights--what and all that is now to
be at an end and the disenchantment of woman is in progress the
tediousness of woman is slowly evolving oh europe! europe! we know
the horned animal which was always most attractive to thee from which
danger is ever again threatening thee! thy old fable might once more
become history--an immense stupidity might once again overmaster
thee and carry thee away! and no god concealed beneath it--no! only an
idea a modern idea!



chapter viii. peoples and countries


. i heard once again for the first time richard wagners overture
to the mastersinger it is a piece of magnificent gorgeous heavy
latter-day art which has the pride to presuppose two centuries of music
as still living in order that it may be understood--it is an honour
to germans that such a pride did not miscalculate! what flavours
and forces what seasons and climes do we not find mingled in it! it
impresses us at one time as ancient at another time as foreign bitter
and too modern it is as arbitrary as it is pompously traditional it
is not infrequently roguish still oftener rough and coarse--it has fire
and courage and at the same time the loose dun-coloured skin of fruits
which ripen too late. it flows broad and full and suddenly there is a
moment of inexplicable hesitation like a gap that opens between cause
and effect an oppression that makes us dream almost a nightmare; but
already it broadens and widens anew the old stream of delight--the most
manifold delight--of old and new happiness; including especially
the joy of the artist in himself which he refuses to conceal his
astonished happy cognizance of his mastery of the expedients here
employed the new newly acquired imperfectly tested expedients of art
which he apparently betrays to us. all in all however no beauty no
south nothing of the delicate southern clearness of the sky nothing
of grace no dance hardly a will to logic; a certain clumsiness even
which is also emphasized as though the artist wished to say to us it
is part of my intention; a cumbersome drapery something arbitrarily
barbaric and ceremonious a flirring of learned and venerable conceits
and witticisms; something german in the best and worst sense of
the word something in the german style manifold formless and
inexhaustible; a certain german potency and super-plenitude of
soul which is not afraid to hide itself under the raffinements of
decadence--which perhaps feels itself most at ease there; a real
genuine token of the german soul which is at the same time young and
aged too ripe and yet still too rich in futurity. this kind of music
expresses best what i think of the germans they belong to the day
before yesterday and the day after tomorrow--they have as yet no today.

. we good europeans we also have hours when we allow ourselves a
warm-hearted patriotism a plunge and relapse into old loves and narrow
views--i have just given an example of it--hours of national excitement
of patriotic anguish and all other sorts of old-fashioned floods of
sentiment. duller spirits may perhaps only get done with what confines
its operations in us to hours and plays itself out in hours--in a
considerable time some in half a year others in half a lifetime
according to the speed and strength with which they digest and change
their material. indeed i could think of sluggish hesitating races
which even in our rapidly moving europe would require half a century
ere they could surmount such atavistic attacks of patriotism and
soil-attachment and return once more to reason that is to say to
good europeanism. and while digressing on this possibility i
happen to become an ear-witness of a conversation between two old
patriots--they were evidently both hard of hearing and consequently
spoke all the louder. he has as much and knows as much philosophy as
a peasant or a corps-student said the one--he is still innocent. but
what does that matter nowadays! it is the age of the masses they lie on
their belly before everything that is massive. and so also in politicis.
a statesman who rears up for them a new tower of babel some monstrosity
of empire and power they call great--what does it matter that we more
prudent and conservative ones do not meanwhile give up the old belief
that it is only the great thought that gives greatness to an action or
affair. supposing a statesman were to bring his people into the position
of being obliged henceforth to practise high politics for which they
were by nature badly endowed and prepared so that they would have
to sacrifice their old and reliable virtues out of love to a new and
doubtful mediocrity;--supposing a statesman were to condemn his people
generally to practise politics when they have hitherto had something
better to do and think about and when in the depths of their souls
they have been unable to free themselves from a prudent loathing of
the restlessness emptiness and noisy wranglings of the essentially
politics-practising nations;--supposing such a statesman were to
stimulate the slumbering passions and avidities of his people were to
make a stigma out of their former diffidence and delight in aloofness
an offence out of their exoticism and hidden permanency were to
depreciate their most radical proclivities subvert their consciences
make their minds narrow and their tastes national--what! a statesman
who should do all this which his people would have to do penance for
throughout their whole future if they had a future such a statesman
would be great would he--undoubtedly! replied the other old patriot
vehemently otherwise he could not have done it! it was mad perhaps to
wish such a thing! but perhaps everything great has been just as mad
at its commencement!--misuse of words! cried his interlocutor
contradictorily--strong! strong! strong and mad! not great!--the old
men had obviously become heated as they thus shouted their truths in
each others faces but i in my happiness and apartness considered how
soon a stronger one may become master of the strong and also that
there is a compensation for the intellectual superficialising of a
nation--namely in the deepening of another.

. whether we call it civilization or humanising or progress
which now distinguishes the european whether we call it simply without
praise or blame by the political formula the democratic movement in
europe--behind all the moral and political foregrounds pointed to by
such formulas an immense physiological process goes on which is ever
extending the process of the assimilation of europeans their
increasing detachment from the conditions under which climatically and
hereditarily united races originate their increasing independence of
every definite milieu that for centuries would fain inscribe itself
with equal demands on soul and body--that is to say the slow emergence
of an essentially super-national and nomadic species of man who
possesses physiologically speaking a maximum of the art and power
of adaptation as his typical distinction. this process of the evolving
european which can be retarded in its tempo by great relapses but
will perhaps just gain and grow thereby in vehemence and depth--the
still-raging storm and stress of national sentiment pertains to it
and also the anarchism which is appearing at present--this process
will probably arrive at results on which its naive propagators and
panegyrists the apostles of modern ideas would least care to reckon.
the same new conditions under which on an average a levelling and
mediocrising of man will take place--a useful industrious variously
serviceable and clever gregarious man--are in the highest degree
suitable to give rise to exceptional men of the most dangerous and
attractive qualities. for while the capacity for adaptation which is
every day trying changing conditions and begins a new work with every
generation almost with every decade makes the powerfulness of the type
impossible; while the collective impression of such future europeans
will probably be that of numerous talkative weak-willed and very
handy workmen who require a master a commander as they require their
daily bread; while therefore the democratising of europe will tend to
the production of a type prepared for slavery in the most subtle
sense of the term the strong man will necessarily in individual and
exceptional cases become stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever
been before--owing to the unprejudicedness of his schooling owing to
the immense variety of practice art and disguise. i meant to say
that the democratising of europe is at the same time an involuntary
arrangement for the rearing of tyrants--taking the word in all its
meanings even in its most spiritual sense.

. i hear with pleasure that our sun is moving rapidly towards the
constellation hercules and i hope that the men on this earth will do
like the sun. and we foremost we good europeans!

. there was a time when it was customary to call germans deep
by way of distinction; but now that the most successful type of new
germanism is covetous of quite other honours and perhaps misses
smartness in all that has depth it is almost opportune and patriotic
to doubt whether we did not formerly deceive ourselves with that
commendation in short whether german depth is not at bottom something
different and worse--and something from which thank god we are on the
point of successfully ridding ourselves. let us try then to relearn
with regard to german depth; the only thing necessary for the purpose is
a little vivisection of the german soul.--the german soul is above all
manifold varied in its source aggregated and super-imposed rather
than actually built this is owing to its origin. a german who would
embolden himself to assert two souls alas dwell in my breast would
make a bad guess at the truth or more correctly he would come far
short of the truth about the number of souls. as a people made up of
the most extraordinary mixing and mingling of races perhaps even with a
preponderance of the pre-aryan element as the people of the centre in
every sense of the term the germans are more intangible more ample
more contradictory more unknown more incalculable more surprising
and even more terrifying than other peoples are to themselves--they
escape definition and are thereby alone the despair of the french. it
is characteristic of the germans that the question what is german
never dies out among them. kotzebue certainly knew his germans well
enough we are known they cried jubilantly to him--but sand also
thought he knew them. jean paul knew what he was doing when he declared
himself incensed at fichtes lying but patriotic flatteries and
exaggerations--but it is probable that goethe thought differently about
germans from jean paul even though he acknowledged him to be right with
regard to fichte. it is a question what goethe really thought about the
germans--but about many things around him he never spoke explicitly
and all his life he knew how to keep an astute silence--probably he
had good reason for it. it is certain that it was not the wars of
independence that made him look up more joyfully any more than it was
the french revolution--the event on account of which he reconstructed
his faust and indeed the whole problem of man was the appearance
of napoleon. there are words of goethe in which he condemns with
impatient severity as from a foreign land that which germans take a
pride in he once defined the famous german turn of mind as indulgence
towards its own and others weaknesses. was he wrong it is
characteristic of germans that one is seldom entirely wrong about them.
the german soul has passages and galleries in it there are caves
hiding-places and dungeons therein its disorder has much of the charm
of the mysterious the german is well acquainted with the bypaths to
chaos. and as everything loves its symbol so the german loves the
clouds and all that is obscure evolving crepuscular damp and
shrouded it seems to him that everything uncertain undeveloped
self-displacing and growing is deep. the german himself does not
exist he is becoming he is developing himself. development is
therefore the essentially german discovery and hit in the great domain
of philosophical formulas--a ruling idea which together with german
beer and german music is labouring to germanise all europe. foreigners
are astonished and attracted by the riddles which the conflicting nature
at the basis of the german soul propounds to them riddles which
hegel systematised and richard wagner has in the end set to music.
good-natured and spiteful--such a juxtaposition preposterous in the
case of every other people is unfortunately only too often justified
in germany one has only to live for a while among swabians to know this!
the clumsiness of the german scholar and his social distastefulness
agree alarmingly well with his physical rope-dancing and nimble
boldness of which all the gods have learnt to be afraid. if any one
wishes to see the german soul demonstrated ad oculos let him
only look at german taste at german arts and manners what boorish
indifference to taste! how the noblest and the commonest stand there
in juxtaposition! how disorderly and how rich is the whole constitution
of this soul! the german drags at his soul he drags at everything he
experiences. he digests his events badly; he never gets done
with them; and german depth is often only a difficult hesitating
digestion. and just as all chronic invalids all dyspeptics like what
is convenient so the german loves frankness and honesty; it is
so convenient to be frank and honest!--this confidingness this
complaisance this showing-the-cards of german honesty is probably the
most dangerous and most successful disguise which the german is up to
nowadays it is his proper mephistophelean art; with this he can still
achieve much! the german lets himself go and thereby gazes with
faithful blue empty german eyes--and other countries immediately
confound him with his dressing-gown!--i meant to say that let german
depth be what it will--among ourselves alone we perhaps take the
liberty to laugh at it--we shall do well to continue henceforth to
honour its appearance and good name and not barter away too cheaply our
old reputation as a people of depth for prussian smartness and
berlin wit and sand. it is wise for a people to pose and let itself
be regarded as profound clumsy good-natured honest and foolish it
might even be--profound to do so! finally we should do honour to
our name--we are not called the tiusche volk deceptive people for
nothing....

. the good old time is past it sang itself out in mozart--how
happy are we that his rococo still speaks to us that his good
company his tender enthusiasm his childish delight in the chinese and
its flourishes his courtesy of heart his longing for the elegant the
amorous the tripping the tearful and his belief in the south can
still appeal to something left in us! ah some time or other it will be
over with it!--but who can doubt that it will be over still sooner with
the intelligence and taste for beethoven! for he was only the last echo
of a break and transition in style and not like mozart the last echo
of a great european taste which had existed for centuries. beethoven
is the intermediate event between an old mellow soul that is constantly
breaking down and a future over-young soul that is always coming;
there is spread over his music the twilight of eternal loss and eternal
extravagant hope--the same light in which europe was bathed when it
dreamed with rousseau when it danced round the tree of liberty of the
revolution and finally almost fell down in adoration before napoleon.
but how rapidly does this very sentiment now pale how difficult
nowadays is even the apprehension of this sentiment how strangely does
the language of rousseau schiller shelley and byron sound to our ear
in whom collectively the same fate of europe was able to speak which
knew how to sing in beethoven!--whatever german music came afterwards
belongs to romanticism that is to say to a movement which
historically considered was still shorter more fleeting and more
superficial than that great interlude the transition of europe from
rousseau to napoleon and to the rise of democracy. weber--but what do
we care nowadays for freischutz and oberon! or marschners hans
heiling and vampyre! or even wagners tannhauser! that is extinct
although not yet forgotten music. this whole music of romanticism
besides was not noble enough was not musical enough to maintain its
position anywhere but in the theatre and before the masses; from the
beginning it was second-rate music which was little thought of by
genuine musicians. it was different with felix mendelssohn that halcyon
master who on account of his lighter purer happier soul quickly
acquired admiration and was equally quickly forgotten as the beautiful
episode of german music. but with regard to robert schumann who took
things seriously and has been taken seriously from the first--he
was the last that founded a school--do we not now regard it as a
satisfaction a relief a deliverance that this very romanticism
of schumanns has been surmounted schumann fleeing into the saxon
switzerland of his soul with a half werther-like half jean-paul-like
nature assuredly not like beethoven! assuredly not like byron!--his
manfred music is a mistake and a misunderstanding to the extent of
injustice; schumann with his taste which was fundamentally a petty
taste that is to say a dangerous propensity--doubly dangerous among
germans--for quiet lyricism and intoxication of the feelings going
constantly apart timidly withdrawing and retiring a noble weakling who
revelled in nothing but anonymous joy and sorrow from the beginning
a sort of girl and noli me tangere--this schumann was already merely a
german event in music and no longer a european event as beethoven had
been as in a still greater degree mozart had been; with schumann german
music was threatened with its greatest danger that of losing the voice
for the soul of europe and sinking into a merely national affair.

. what a torture are books written in german to a reader who has a
third ear! how indignantly he stands beside the slowly turning swamp
of sounds without tune and rhythms without dance which germans call
a book! and even the german who reads books! how lazily how
reluctantly how badly he reads! how many germans know and consider it
obligatory to know that there is art in every good sentence--art which
must be divined if the sentence is to be understood! if there is a
misunderstanding about its tempo for instance the sentence itself
is misunderstood! that one must not be doubtful about the
rhythm-determining syllables that one should feel the breaking of the
too-rigid symmetry as intentional and as a charm that one should lend a
fine and patient ear to every staccato and every rubato that one should
divine the sense in the sequence of the vowels and diphthongs and how
delicately and richly they can be tinted and retinted in the order of
their arrangement--who among book-reading germans is complaisant enough
to recognize such duties and requirements and to listen to so much art
and intention in language after all one just has no ear for it;
and so the most marked contrasts of style are not heard and the most
delicate artistry is as it were squandered on the deaf.--these were my
thoughts when i noticed how clumsily and unintuitively two masters in
the art of prose-writing have been confounded one whose words drop
down hesitatingly and coldly as from the roof of a damp cave--he counts
on their dull sound and echo; and another who manipulates his language
like a flexible sword and from his arm down into his toes feels the
dangerous bliss of the quivering over-sharp blade which wishes to
bite hiss and cut.

. how little the german style has to do with harmony and with the
ear is shown by the fact that precisely our good musicians themselves
write badly. the german does not read aloud he does not read for the
ear but only with his eyes; he has put his ears away in the drawer for
the time. in antiquity when a man read--which was seldom enough--he read
something to himself and in a loud voice; they were surprised when
any one read silently and sought secretly the reason of it. in a
loud voice that is to say with all the swellings inflections and
variations of key and changes of tempo in which the ancient public
world took delight. the laws of the written style were then the same
as those of the spoken style; and these laws depended partly on the
surprising development and refined requirements of the ear and larynx;
partly on the strength endurance and power of the ancient lungs. in
the ancient sense a period is above all a physiological whole inasmuch
as it is comprised in one breath. such periods as occur in demosthenes
and cicero swelling twice and sinking twice and all in one breath
were pleasures to the men of antiquity who knew by their own schooling
how to appreciate the virtue therein the rareness and the difficulty
in the deliverance of such a period;--we have really no right to the
big period we modern men who are short of breath in every sense! those
ancients indeed were all of them dilettanti in speaking consequently
connoisseurs consequently critics--they thus brought their orators to
the highest pitch; in the same manner as in the last century when all
italian ladies and gentlemen knew how to sing the virtuosoship of song
and with it also the art of melody reached its elevation. in germany
however until quite recently when a kind of platform eloquence began
shyly and awkwardly enough to flutter its young wings there was
properly speaking only one kind of public and approximately artistical
discourse--that delivered from the pulpit. the preacher was the only one
in germany who knew the weight of a syllable or a word in what manner a
sentence strikes springs rushes flows and comes to a close; he alone
had a conscience in his ears often enough a bad conscience for reasons
are not lacking why proficiency in oratory should be especially seldom
attained by a german or almost always too late. the masterpiece of
german prose is therefore with good reason the masterpiece of its
greatest preacher the bible has hitherto been the best german
book. compared with luthers bible almost everything else is merely
literature--something which has not grown in germany and therefore
has not taken and does not take root in german hearts as the bible has
done.

. there are two kinds of geniuses one which above all engenders and
seeks to engender and another which willingly lets itself be fructified
and brings forth. and similarly among the gifted nations there are
those on whom the womans problem of pregnancy has devolved and the
secret task of forming maturing and perfecting--the greeks for
instance were a nation of this kind and so are the french; and others
which have to fructify and become the cause of new modes of life--like
the jews the romans and in all modesty be it asked like the
germans--nations tortured and enraptured by unknown fevers and
irresistibly forced out of themselves amorous and longing for
foreign races for such as let themselves be fructified and withal
imperious like everything conscious of being full of generative force
and consequently empowered by the grace of god. these two kinds of
geniuses seek each other like man and woman; but they also misunderstand
each other--like man and woman.

. every nation has its own tartuffery and calls that its
virtue.--one does not know--cannot know the best that is in one.

. what europe owes to the jews--many things good and bad and above
all one thing of the nature both of the best and the worst the grand
style in morality the fearfulness and majesty of infinite demands of
infinite significations the whole romanticism and sublimity of moral
questionableness--and consequently just the most attractive ensnaring
and exquisite element in those iridescences and allurements to life
in the aftersheen of which the sky of our european culture its evening
sky now glows--perhaps glows out. for this we artists among the
spectators and philosophers are--grateful to the jews.

. it must be taken into the bargain if various clouds and
disturbances--in short slight attacks of stupidity--pass over the
spirit of a people that suffers and wants to suffer from national
nervous fever and political ambition for instance among present-day
germans there is alternately the anti-french folly the anti-semitic
folly the anti-polish folly the christian-romantic folly the
wagnerian folly the teutonic folly the prussian folly just look at
those poor historians the sybels and treitschkes and their closely
bandaged heads and whatever else these little obscurations of the
german spirit and conscience may be called. may it be forgiven me that
i too when on a short daring sojourn on very infected ground did not
remain wholly exempt from the disease but like every one else began
to entertain thoughts about matters which did not concern me--the first
symptom of political infection. about the jews for instance listen
to the following--i have never yet met a german who was favourably
inclined to the jews; and however decided the repudiation of actual
anti-semitism may be on the part of all prudent and political men this
prudence and policy is not perhaps directed against the nature of the
sentiment itself but only against its dangerous excess and especially
against the distasteful and infamous expression of this excess of
sentiment;--on this point we must not deceive ourselves. that germany
has amply sufficient jews that the german stomach the german blood
has difficulty and will long have difficulty in disposing only of this
quantity of jew--as the italian the frenchman and the englishman
have done by means of a stronger digestion--that is the unmistakable
declaration and language of a general instinct to which one must listen
and according to which one must act. let no more jews come in! and shut
the doors especially towards the east also towards austria!--thus
commands the instinct of a people whose nature is still feeble and
uncertain so that it could be easily wiped out easily extinguished by
a stronger race. the jews however are beyond all doubt the strongest
toughest and purest race at present living in europe they know how
to succeed even under the worst conditions in fact better than under
favourable ones by means of virtues of some sort which one would like
nowadays to label as vices--owing above all to a resolute faith which
does not need to be ashamed before modern ideas they alter only
when they do alter in the same way that the russian empire makes
its conquest--as an empire that has plenty of time and is not of
yesterday--namely according to the principle as slowly as possible!
a thinker who has the future of europe at heart will in all his
perspectives concerning the future calculate upon the jews as he
will calculate upon the russians as above all the surest and likeliest
factors in the great play and battle of forces. that which is at present
called a nation in europe and is really rather a res facta than nata
indeed sometimes confusingly similar to a res ficta et picta is in
every case something evolving young easily displaced and not yet
a race much less such a race aere perennus as the jews are such
nations should most carefully avoid all hot-headed rivalry and
hostility! it is certain that the jews if they desired--or if they
were driven to it as the anti-semites seem to wish--could now have the
ascendancy nay literally the supremacy over europe that they are not
working and planning for that end is equally certain. meanwhile they
rather wish and desire even somewhat importunely to be insorbed and
absorbed by europe they long to be finally settled authorized and
respected somewhere and wish to put an end to the nomadic life to the
wandering jew--and one should certainly take account of this impulse
and tendency and make advances to it it possibly betokens a mitigation
of the jewish instincts for which purpose it would perhaps be useful
and fair to banish the anti-semitic bawlers out of the country. one
should make advances with all prudence and with selection pretty much
as the english nobility do it stands to reason that the more powerful
and strongly marked types of new germanism could enter into relation
with the jews with the least hesitation for instance the nobleman
officer from the prussian border it would be interesting in many ways
to see whether the genius for money and patience and especially some
intellect and intellectuality--sadly lacking in the place referred to
could not in addition be annexed and trained to the hereditary art of
commanding and obeying--for both of which the country in question has
now a classic reputation but here it is expedient to break off my festal
discourse and my sprightly teutonomania for i have already reached my
serious topic the european problem as i understand it the rearing
of a new ruling caste for europe.

. they are not a philosophical race--the english bacon represents an
attack on the philosophical spirit generally hobbes hume and locke
an abasement and a depreciation of the idea of a philosopher for more
than a century. it was against hume that kant uprose and raised himself;
it was locke of whom schelling rightly said je meprise locke; in the
struggle against the english mechanical stultification of the world
hegel and schopenhauer along with goethe were of one accord; the
two hostile brother-geniuses in philosophy who pushed in different
directions towards the opposite poles of german thought and thereby
wronged each other as only brothers will do.--what is lacking in
england and has always been lacking that half-actor and rhetorician
knew well enough the absurd muddle-head carlyle who sought to conceal
under passionate grimaces what he knew about himself namely what was
lacking in carlyle--real power of intellect real depth of intellectual
perception in short philosophy. it is characteristic of such an
unphilosophical race to hold on firmly to christianity--they need its
discipline for moralizing and humanizing. the englishman more gloomy
sensual headstrong and brutal than the german--is for that very
reason as the baser of the two also the most pious he has all the
more need of christianity. to finer nostrils this english christianity
itself has still a characteristic english taint of spleen and alcoholic
excess for which owing to good reasons it is used as an antidote--the
finer poison to neutralize the coarser a finer form of poisoning is
in fact a step in advance with coarse-mannered people a step towards
spiritualization. the english coarseness and rustic demureness is still
most satisfactorily disguised by christian pantomime and by praying
and psalm-singing or more correctly it is thereby explained and
differently expressed; and for the herd of drunkards and rakes who
formerly learned moral grunting under the influence of methodism and
more recently as the salvation army a penitential fit may really be
the relatively highest manifestation of humanity to which they can
be elevated so much may reasonably be admitted. that however which
offends even in the humanest englishman is his lack of music to speak
figuratively and also literally he has neither rhythm nor dance in
the movements of his soul and body; indeed not even the desire for
rhythm and dance for music. listen to him speaking; look at the most
beautiful englishwoman walking--in no country on earth are there more
beautiful doves and swans; finally listen to them singing! but i ask
too much...

. there are truths which are best recognized by mediocre minds
because they are best adapted for them there are truths which only
possess charms and seductive power for mediocre spirits--one is pushed
to this probably unpleasant conclusion now that the influence of
respectable but mediocre englishmen--i may mention darwin john
stuart mill and herbert spencer--begins to gain the ascendancy in the
middle-class region of european taste. indeed who could doubt that it
is a useful thing for such minds to have the ascendancy for a time it
would be an error to consider the highly developed and independently
soaring minds as specially qualified for determining and collecting many
little common facts and deducing conclusions from them; as exceptions
they are rather from the first in no very favourable position towards
those who are the rules. after all they have more to do than merely
to perceive--in effect they have to be something new they have to
signify something new they have to represent new values! the gulf
between knowledge and capacity is perhaps greater and also more
mysterious than one thinks the capable man in the grand style the
creator will possibly have to be an ignorant person;--while on the
other hand for scientific discoveries like those of darwin a certain
narrowness aridity and industrious carefulness in short something
english may not be unfavourable for arriving at them.--finally let
it not be forgotten that the english with their profound mediocrity
brought about once before a general depression of european intelligence.

what is called modern ideas or the ideas of the eighteenth century
or french ideas--that consequently against which the german mind
rose up with profound disgust--is of english origin there is no doubt
about it. the french were only the apes and actors of these ideas their
best soldiers and likewise alas! their first and profoundest victims;
for owing to the diabolical anglomania of modern ideas the ame
francais has in the end become so thin and emaciated that at present
one recalls its sixteenth and seventeenth centuries its profound
passionate strength its inventive excellency almost with disbelief.
one must however maintain this verdict of historical justice in
a determined manner and defend it against present prejudices and
appearances the european noblesse--of sentiment taste and manners
taking the word in every high sense--is the work and invention of
france; the european ignobleness the plebeianism of modern ideas--is
englands work and invention.

. even at present france is still the seat of the most intellectual
and refined culture of europe it is still the high school of taste; but
one must know how to find this france of taste. he who belongs to it
keeps himself well concealed--they may be a small number in whom it
lives and is embodied besides perhaps being men who do not stand upon
the strongest legs in part fatalists hypochondriacs invalids in
part persons over-indulged over-refined such as have the ambition to
conceal themselves.

they have all something in common they keep their ears closed in
presence of the delirious folly and noisy spouting of the democratic
bourgeois. in fact a besotted and brutalized france at present sprawls
in the foreground--it recently celebrated a veritable orgy of bad taste
and at the same time of self-admiration at the funeral of victor hugo.
there is also something else common to them a predilection to resist
intellectual germanizing--and a still greater inability to do so!
in this france of intellect which is also a france of pessimism
schopenhauer has perhaps become more at home and more indigenous than
he has ever been in germany; not to speak of heinrich heine who has
long ago been re-incarnated in the more refined and fastidious lyrists
of paris; or of hegel who at present in the form of taine--the first
of living historians--exercises an almost tyrannical influence. as
regards richard wagner however the more french music learns to
adapt itself to the actual needs of the ame moderne the more will it
wagnerite; one can safely predict that beforehand--it is already
taking place sufficiently! there are however three things which the
french can still boast of with pride as their heritage and possession
and as indelible tokens of their ancient intellectual superiority
in europe in spite of all voluntary or involuntary germanizing and
vulgarizing of taste. firstly the capacity for artistic emotion for
devotion to form for which the expression lart pour lart along
with numerous others has been invented--such capacity has not been
lacking in france for three centuries; and owing to its reverence for
the small number it has again and again made a sort of chamber
music of literature possible which is sought for in vain elsewhere
in europe.--the second thing whereby the french can lay claim to
a superiority over europe is their ancient many-sided moralistic
culture owing to which one finds on an average even in the petty
romanciers of the newspapers and chance boulevardiers de paris a
psychological sensitiveness and curiosity of which for example one
has no conception to say nothing of the thing itself! in germany.
the germans lack a couple of centuries of the moralistic work requisite
thereto which as we have said france has not grudged those who call
the germans naive on that account give them commendation for a defect.
as the opposite of the german inexperience and innocence in voluptate
psychologica which is not too remotely associated with the tediousness
of german intercourse--and as the most successful expression of
genuine french curiosity and inventive talent in this domain of delicate
thrills henri beyle may be noted; that remarkable anticipatory and
forerunning man who with a napoleonic tempo traversed his europe
in fact several centuries of the european soul as a surveyor and
discoverer thereof--it has required two generations to overtake him
one way or other to divine long afterwards some of the riddles
that perplexed and enraptured him--this strange epicurean and man of
interrogation the last great psychologist of france.--there is yet
a third claim to superiority in the french character there is a
successful half-way synthesis of the north and south which makes them
comprehend many things and enjoins upon them other things which an
englishman can never comprehend. their temperament turned alternately
to and from the south in which from time to time the provencal and
ligurian blood froths over preserves them from the dreadful northern
grey-in-grey from sunless conceptual-spectrism and from poverty of
blood--our german infirmity of taste for the excessive prevalence
of which at the present moment blood and iron that is to say high
politics has with great resolution been prescribed according to
a dangerous healing art which bids me wait and wait but not yet
hope.--there is also still in france a pre-understanding and
ready welcome for those rarer and rarely gratified men who are too
comprehensive to find satisfaction in any kind of fatherlandism and
know how to love the south when in the north and the north when in the
south--the born midlanders the good europeans. for them bizet
has made music this latest genius who has seen a new beauty and
seduction--who has discovered a piece of the south in music.

. i hold that many precautions should be taken against german music.
suppose a person loves the south as i love it--as a great school
of recovery for the most spiritual and the most sensuous ills as a
boundless solar profusion and effulgence which oerspreads a sovereign
existence believing in itself--well such a person will learn to be
somewhat on his guard against german music because in injuring his
taste anew it will also injure his health anew. such a southerner a
southerner not by origin but by belief if he should dream of the future
of music must also dream of it being freed from the influence of the
north; and must have in his ears the prelude to a deeper mightier and
perhaps more perverse and mysterious music a super-german music which
does not fade pale and die away as all german music does at the
sight of the blue wanton sea and the mediterranean clearness of sky--a
super-european music which holds its own even in presence of the brown
sunsets of the desert whose soul is akin to the palm-tree and can be
at home and can roam with big beautiful lonely beasts of prey... i
could imagine a music of which the rarest charm would be that it knew
nothing more of good and evil; only that here and there perhaps some
sailors home-sickness some golden shadows and tender weaknesses might
sweep lightly over it; an art which from the far distance would see
the colours of a sinking and almost incomprehensible moral world fleeing
towards it and would be hospitable enough and profound enough to
receive such belated fugitives.

. owing to the morbid estrangement which the nationality-craze has
induced and still induces among the nations of europe owing also to the
short-sighted and hasty-handed politicians who with the help of this
craze are at present in power and do not suspect to what extent the
disintegrating policy they pursue must necessarily be only an interlude
policy--owing to all this and much else that is altogether unmentionable
at present the most unmistakable signs that europe wishes to be one
are now overlooked or arbitrarily and falsely misinterpreted. with all
the more profound and large-minded men of this century the real general
tendency of the mysterious labour of their souls was to prepare the way
for that new synthesis and tentatively to anticipate the european of
the future; only in their simulations or in their weaker moments in
old age perhaps did they belong to the fatherlands--they only rested
from themselves when they became patriots. i think of such men as
napoleon goethe beethoven stendhal heinrich heine schopenhauer it
must not be taken amiss if i also count richard wagner among them about
whom one must not let oneself be deceived by his own misunderstandings
geniuses like him have seldom the right to understand themselves
still less of course by the unseemly noise with which he is now
resisted and opposed in france the fact remains nevertheless that
richard wagner and the later french romanticism of the forties are
most closely and intimately related to one another. they are akin
fundamentally akin in all the heights and depths of their requirements;
it is europe the one europe whose soul presses urgently and longingly
outwards and upwards in their multifarious and boisterous art--whither
into a new light towards a new sun but who would attempt to express
accurately what all these masters of new modes of speech could not
express distinctly it is certain that the same storm and stress
tormented them that they sought in the same manner these last great
seekers! all of them steeped in literature to their eyes and ears--the
first artists of universal literary culture--for the most part even
themselves writers poets intermediaries and blenders of the arts and
the senses wagner as musician is reckoned among painters as poet
among musicians as artist generally among actors; all of them fanatics
for expression at any cost--i specially mention delacroix the nearest
related to wagner; all of them great discoverers in the realm of the
sublime also of the loathsome and dreadful still greater discoverers
in effect in display in the art of the show-shop; all of them talented
far beyond their genius out and out virtuosi with mysterious accesses
to all that seduces allures constrains and upsets; born enemies of
logic and of the straight line hankering after the strange the
exotic the monstrous the crooked and the self-contradictory; as men
tantaluses of the will plebeian parvenus who knew themselves to be
incapable of a noble tempo or of a lento in life and action--think
of balzac for instance--unrestrained workers almost destroying
themselves by work; antinomians and rebels in manners ambitious and
insatiable without equilibrium and enjoyment; all of them finally
shattering and sinking down at the christian cross and with right
and reason for who of them would have been sufficiently profound and
sufficiently original for an anti-christian philosophy;--on the
whole a boldly daring splendidly overbearing high-flying and
aloft-up-dragging class of higher men who had first to teach their
century--and it is the century of the masses--the conception higher
man.... let the german friends of richard wagner advise together as to
whether there is anything purely german in the wagnerian art or whether
its distinction does not consist precisely in coming from super-german
sources and impulses in which connection it may not be underrated
how indispensable paris was to the development of his type which the
strength of his instincts made him long to visit at the most
decisive time--and how the whole style of his proceedings of his
self-apostolate could only perfect itself in sight of the french
socialistic original. on a more subtle comparison it will perhaps be
found to the honour of richard wagners german nature that he has
acted in everything with more strength daring severity and elevation
than a nineteenth-century frenchman could have done--owing to the
circumstance that we germans are as yet nearer to barbarism than the
french;--perhaps even the most remarkable creation of richard wagner is
not only at present but for ever inaccessible incomprehensible and
inimitable to the whole latter-day latin race the figure of siegfried
that very free man who is probably far too free too hard too
cheerful too healthy too anti-catholic for the taste of old and mellow
civilized nations. he may even have been a sin against romanticism this
anti-latin siegfried well wagner atoned amply for this sin in his old
sad days when--anticipating a taste which has meanwhile passed into
politics--he began with the religious vehemence peculiar to him to
preach at least the way to rome if not to walk therein.--that
these last words may not be misunderstood i will call to my aid a few
powerful rhymes which will even betray to less delicate ears what i
mean--what i mean counter to the last wagner and his parsifal music--

--is this our mode--from german heart came this vexed ululating from
german body this self-lacerating is ours this priestly hand-dilation
this incense-fuming exaltation is ours this faltering falling
shambling this quite uncertain ding-dong-dangling this sly
nun-ogling ave-hour-bell ringing this wholly false enraptured
heaven-oerspringing--is this our mode--think well!--ye still wait for
admission--for what ye hear is rome--romes faith by intuition!



chapter ix. what is noble


. every elevation of the type man has hitherto been the work of an
aristocratic society and so it will always be--a society believing in
a long scale of gradations of rank and differences of worth among human
beings and requiring slavery in some form or other. without the pathos
of distance such as grows out of the incarnated difference of classes
out of the constant out-looking and down-looking of the ruling caste on
subordinates and instruments and out of their equally constant
practice of obeying and commanding of keeping down and keeping at a
distance--that other more mysterious pathos could never have arisen the
longing for an ever new widening of distance within the soul itself
the formation of ever higher rarer further more extended more
comprehensive states in short just the elevation of the type man
the continued self-surmounting of man to use a moral formula in
a supermoral sense. to be sure one must not resign oneself to
any humanitarian illusions about the history of the origin of an
aristocratic society that is to say of the preliminary condition for
the elevation of the type man the truth is hard. let us acknowledge
unprejudicedly how every higher civilization hitherto has originated!
men with a still natural nature barbarians in every terrible sense of
the word men of prey still in possession of unbroken strength of will
and desire for power threw themselves upon weaker more moral more
peaceful races perhaps trading or cattle-rearing communities or upon
old mellow civilizations in which the final vital force was flickering
out in brilliant fireworks of wit and depravity. at the commencement
the noble caste was always the barbarian caste their superiority did
not consist first of all in their physical but in their psychical
power--they were more complete men which at every point also implies
the same as more complete beasts.

. corruption--as the indication that anarchy threatens to break out
among the instincts and that the foundation of the emotions called
life is convulsed--is something radically different according to
the organization in which it manifests itself. when for instance an
aristocracy like that of france at the beginning of the revolution
flung away its privileges with sublime disgust and sacrificed itself
to an excess of its moral sentiments it was corruption--it was really
only the closing act of the corruption which had existed for centuries
by virtue of which that aristocracy had abdicated step by step its
lordly prerogatives and lowered itself to a function of royalty in
the end even to its decoration and parade-dress. the essential thing
however in a good and healthy aristocracy is that it should not regard
itself as a function either of the kingship or the commonwealth but
as the significance and highest justification thereof--that it should
therefore accept with a good conscience the sacrifice of a legion
of individuals who for its sake must be suppressed and reduced to
imperfect men to slaves and instruments. its fundamental belief must
be precisely that society is not allowed to exist for its own sake but
only as a foundation and scaffolding by means of which a select class
of beings may be able to elevate themselves to their higher duties and
in general to a higher existence like those sun-seeking climbing plants
in java--they are called sipo matador--which encircle an oak so
long and so often with their arms until at last high above it but
supported by it they can unfold their tops in the open light and
exhibit their happiness.

. to refrain mutually from injury from violence from exploitation
and put ones will on a par with that of others this may result in a
certain rough sense in good conduct among individuals when the necessary
conditions are given namely the actual similarity of the individuals
in amount of force and degree of worth and their co-relation within one
organization. as soon however as one wished to take this principle
more generally and if possible even as the fundamental principle of
society it would immediately disclose what it really is--namely a will
to the denial of life a principle of dissolution and decay. here one
must think profoundly to the very basis and resist all sentimental
weakness life itself is essentially appropriation injury conquest
of the strange and weak suppression severity obtrusion of
peculiar forms incorporation and at the least putting it mildest
exploitation;--but why should one for ever use precisely these words
on which for ages a disparaging purpose has been stamped even the
organization within which as was previously supposed the
individuals treat each other as equal--it takes place in every
healthy aristocracy--must itself if it be a living and not a dying
organization do all that towards other bodies which the individuals
within it refrain from doing to each other it will have to be the
incarnated will to power it will endeavour to grow to gain ground
attract to itself and acquire ascendancy--not owing to any morality or
immorality but because it lives and because life is precisely will to
power. on no point however is the ordinary consciousness of europeans
more unwilling to be corrected than on this matter people now rave
everywhere even under the guise of science about coming conditions of
society in which the exploiting character is to be absent--that sounds
to my ears as if they promised to invent a mode of life which should
refrain from all organic functions. exploitation does not belong to a
depraved or imperfect and primitive society it belongs to the nature of
the living being as a primary organic function it is a consequence
of the intrinsic will to power which is precisely the will to
life--granting that as a theory this is a novelty--as a reality it is
the fundamental fact of all history let us be so far honest towards
ourselves!

. in a tour through the many finer and coarser moralities which have
hitherto prevailed or still prevail on the earth i found certain traits
recurring regularly together and connected with one another until
finally two primary types revealed themselves to me and a radical
distinction was brought to light. there is master-morality and
slave-morality--i would at once add however that in all higher and
mixed civilizations there are also attempts at the reconciliation of
the two moralities but one finds still oftener the confusion and
mutual misunderstanding of them indeed sometimes their close
juxtaposition--even in the same man within one soul. the distinctions
of moral values have either originated in a ruling caste pleasantly
conscious of being different from the ruled--or among the ruled class
the slaves and dependents of all sorts. in the first case when it is
the rulers who determine the conception good it is the exalted proud
disposition which is regarded as the distinguishing feature and that
which determines the order of rank. the noble type of man separates
from himself the beings in whom the opposite of this exalted proud
disposition displays itself he despises them. let it at once be noted
that in this first kind of morality the antithesis good and bad
means practically the same as noble and despicable--the antithesis
good and evil is of a different origin. the cowardly the timid the
insignificant and those thinking merely of narrow utility are despised;
moreover also the distrustful with their constrained glances the
self-abasing the dog-like kind of men who let themselves be abused
the mendicant flatterers and above all the liars--it is a fundamental
belief of all aristocrats that the common people are untruthful. we
truthful ones--the nobility in ancient greece called themselves. it is
obvious that everywhere the designations of moral value were at first
applied to men; and were only derivatively and at a later period applied
to actions; it is a gross mistake therefore when historians of morals
start with questions like why have sympathetic actions been praised
the noble type of man regards himself as a determiner of values; he
does not require to be approved of; he passes the judgment what is
injurious to me is injurious in itself; he knows that it is he himself
only who confers honour on things; he is a creator of values. he
honours whatever he recognizes in himself such morality equals
self-glorification. in the foreground there is the feeling of plenitude
of power which seeks to overflow the happiness of high tension the
consciousness of a wealth which would fain give and bestow--the noble
man also helps the unfortunate but not--or scarcely--out of pity but
rather from an impulse generated by the super-abundance of power. the
noble man honours in himself the powerful one him also who has power
over himself who knows how to speak and how to keep silence who
takes pleasure in subjecting himself to severity and hardness and has
reverence for all that is severe and hard. wotan placed a hard heart in
my breast says an old scandinavian saga it is thus rightly expressed
from the soul of a proud viking. such a type of man is even proud of not
being made for sympathy; the hero of the saga therefore adds warningly
he who has not a hard heart when young will never have one. the noble
and brave who think thus are the furthest removed from the morality
which sees precisely in sympathy or in acting for the good of others
or in desinteressement the characteristic of the moral; faith
in oneself pride in oneself a radical enmity and irony towards
selflessness belong as definitely to noble morality as do a careless
scorn and precaution in presence of sympathy and the warm heart.--it
is the powerful who know how to honour it is their art their domain
for invention. the profound reverence for age and for tradition--all law
rests on this double reverence--the belief and prejudice in favour of
ancestors and unfavourable to newcomers is typical in the morality of
the powerful; and if reversely men of modern ideas believe almost
instinctively in progress and the future and are more and more
lacking in respect for old age the ignoble origin of these ideas has
complacently betrayed itself thereby. a morality of the ruling class
however is more especially foreign and irritating to present-day taste
in the sternness of its principle that one has duties only to ones
equals; that one may act towards beings of a lower rank towards all
that is foreign just as seems good to one or as the heart desires
and in any case beyond good and evil it is here that sympathy and
similar sentiments can have a place. the ability and obligation to
exercise prolonged gratitude and prolonged revenge--both only within the
circle of equals--artfulness in retaliation raffinement of the idea
in friendship a certain necessity to have enemies as outlets for the
emotions of envy quarrelsomeness arrogance--in fact in order to be
a good friend all these are typical characteristics of the noble
morality which as has been pointed out is not the morality of modern
ideas and is therefore at present difficult to realize and also to
unearth and disclose.--it is otherwise with the second type of morality
slave-morality. supposing that the abused the oppressed the suffering
the unemancipated the weary and those uncertain of themselves should
moralize what will be the common element in their moral estimates
probably a pessimistic suspicion with regard to the entire situation of
man will find expression perhaps a condemnation of man together with
his situation. the slave has an unfavourable eye for the virtues of the
powerful; he has a skepticism and distrust a refinement of distrust of
everything good that is there honoured--he would fain persuade himself
that the very happiness there is not genuine. on the other hand those
qualities which serve to alleviate the existence of sufferers are
brought into prominence and flooded with light; it is here that
sympathy the kind helping hand the warm heart patience diligence
humility and friendliness attain to honour; for here these are the most
useful qualities and almost the only means of supporting the burden of
existence. slave-morality is essentially the morality of utility.
here is the seat of the origin of the famous antithesis good and
evil--power and dangerousness are assumed to reside in the evil
a certain dreadfulness subtlety and strength which do not admit of
being despised. according to slave-morality therefore the evil man
arouses fear; according to master-morality it is precisely the good
man who arouses fear and seeks to arouse it while the bad man is
regarded as the despicable being. the contrast attains its maximum when
in accordance with the logical consequences of slave-morality a shade
of depreciation--it may be slight and well-intentioned--at last attaches
itself to the good man of this morality; because according to the
servile mode of thought the good man must in any case be the safe
man he is good-natured easily deceived perhaps a little stupid un
bonhomme. everywhere that slave-morality gains the ascendancy language
shows a tendency to approximate the significations of the words good
and stupid.--a last fundamental difference the desire for freedom
the instinct for happiness and the refinements of the feeling of liberty
belong as necessarily to slave-morals and morality as artifice and
enthusiasm in reverence and devotion are the regular symptoms of an
aristocratic mode of thinking and estimating.--hence we can understand
without further detail why love as a passion--it is our european
specialty--must absolutely be of noble origin; as is well known its
invention is due to the provencal poet-cavaliers those brilliant
ingenious men of the gai saber to whom europe owes so much and
almost owes itself.

. vanity is one of the things which are perhaps most difficult for
a noble man to understand he will be tempted to deny it where another
kind of man thinks he sees it self-evidently. the problem for him is
to represent to his mind beings who seek to arouse a good opinion of
themselves which they themselves do not possess--and consequently also
do not deserve--and who yet believe in this good opinion
afterwards. this seems to him on the one hand such bad taste and so
self-disrespectful and on the other hand so grotesquely unreasonable
that he would like to consider vanity an exception and is doubtful
about it in most cases when it is spoken of. he will say for
instance i may be mistaken about my value and on the other hand
may nevertheless demand that my value should be acknowledged by others
precisely as i rate it--that however is not vanity but self-conceit
or in most cases that which is called humility and also
modesty. or he will even say for many reasons i can delight in
the good opinion of others perhaps because i love and honour them
and rejoice in all their joys perhaps also because their good opinion
endorses and strengthens my belief in my own good opinion perhaps
because the good opinion of others even in cases where i do not share
it is useful to me or gives promise of usefulness--all this however
is not vanity. the man of noble character must first bring it home
forcibly to his mind especially with the aid of history that from
time immemorial in all social strata in any way dependent the ordinary
man was only that which he passed for--not being at all accustomed to
fix values he did not assign even to himself any other value than that
which his master assigned to him it is the peculiar right of masters to
create values. it may be looked upon as the result of an extraordinary
atavism that the ordinary man even at present is still always waiting
for an opinion about himself and then instinctively submitting himself
to it; yet by no means only to a good opinion but also to a bad
and unjust one think for instance of the greater part of the
self-appreciations and self-depreciations which believing women learn
from their confessors and which in general the believing christian
learns from his church. in fact conformably to the slow rise of the
democratic social order and its cause the blending of the blood
of masters and slaves the originally noble and rare impulse of
the masters to assign a value to themselves and to think well of
themselves will now be more and more encouraged and extended; but
it has at all times an older ampler and more radically ingrained
propensity opposed to it--and in the phenomenon of vanity this older
propensity overmasters the younger. the vain person rejoices over every
good opinion which he hears about himself quite apart from the point
of view of its usefulness and equally regardless of its truth or
falsehood just as he suffers from every bad opinion for he subjects
himself to both he feels himself subjected to both by that oldest
instinct of subjection which breaks forth in him.--it is the slave
in the vain mans blood the remains of the slaves craftiness--and how
much of the slave is still left in woman for instance!--which
seeks to seduce to good opinions of itself; it is the slave too who
immediately afterwards falls prostrate himself before these opinions as
though he had not called them forth.--and to repeat it again vanity is
an atavism.

. a species originates and a type becomes established and strong in
the long struggle with essentially constant unfavourable conditions. on
the other hand it is known by the experience of breeders that species
which receive super-abundant nourishment and in general a surplus of
protection and care immediately tend in the most marked way to develop
variations and are fertile in prodigies and monstrosities also in
monstrous vices. now look at an aristocratic commonwealth say
an ancient greek polis or venice as a voluntary or involuntary
contrivance for the purpose of rearing human beings; there are there men
beside one another thrown upon their own resources who want to make
their species prevail chiefly because they must prevail or else
run the terrible danger of being exterminated. the favour the
super-abundance the protection are there lacking under which variations
are fostered; the species needs itself as species as something which
precisely by virtue of its hardness its uniformity and simplicity of
structure can in general prevail and make itself permanent in
constant struggle with its neighbours or with rebellious or
rebellion-threatening vassals. the most varied experience teaches it
what are the qualities to which it principally owes the fact that
it still exists in spite of all gods and men and has hitherto been
victorious these qualities it calls virtues and these virtues alone
it develops to maturity. it does so with severity indeed it desires
severity; every aristocratic morality is intolerant in the education
of youth in the control of women in the marriage customs in the
relations of old and young in the penal laws which have an eye only
for the degenerating it counts intolerance itself among the virtues
under the name of justice. a type with few but very marked features
a species of severe warlike wisely silent reserved and reticent
men and as such with the most delicate sensibility for the charm and
nuances of society is thus established unaffected by the vicissitudes
of generations; the constant struggle with uniform unfavourable
conditions is as already remarked the cause of a type becoming
stable and hard. finally however a happy state of things results the
enormous tension is relaxed; there are perhaps no more enemies among the
neighbouring peoples and the means of life even of the enjoyment
of life are present in superabundance. with one stroke the bond and
constraint of the old discipline severs it is no longer regarded as
necessary as a condition of existence--if it would continue it can
only do so as a form of luxury as an archaizing taste. variations
whether they be deviations into the higher finer and rarer or
deteriorations and monstrosities appear suddenly on the scene in the
greatest exuberance and splendour; the individual dares to be individual
and detach himself. at this turning-point of history there manifest
themselves side by side and often mixed and entangled together a
magnificent manifold virgin-forest-like up-growth and up-striving a
kind of tropical tempo in the rivalry of growth and an extraordinary
decay and self-destruction owing to the savagely opposing and seemingly
exploding egoisms which strive with one another for sun and light
and can no longer assign any limit restraint or forbearance for
themselves by means of the hitherto existing morality. it was this
morality itself which piled up the strength so enormously which bent
the bow in so threatening a manner--it is now out of date it is
getting out of date. the dangerous and disquieting point has been
reached when the greater more manifold more comprehensive life is
lived beyond the old morality; the individual stands out and is
obliged to have recourse to his own law-giving his own arts and
artifices for self-preservation self-elevation and self-deliverance.
nothing but new whys nothing but new hows no common formulas any
longer misunderstanding and disregard in league with each other decay
deterioration and the loftiest desires frightfully entangled the
genius of the race overflowing from all the cornucopias of good and bad
a portentous simultaneousness of spring and autumn full of new charms
and mysteries peculiar to the fresh still inexhausted still unwearied
corruption. danger is again present the mother of morality great
danger; this time shifted into the individual into the neighbour and
friend into the street into their own child into their own heart
into all the most personal and secret recesses of their desires and
volitions. what will the moral philosophers who appear at this time have
to preach they discover these sharp onlookers and loafers that the
end is quickly approaching that everything around them decays and
produces decay that nothing will endure until the day after tomorrow
except one species of man the incurably mediocre. the mediocre alone
have a prospect of continuing and propagating themselves--they will
be the men of the future the sole survivors; be like them! become
mediocre! is now the only morality which has still a significance
which still obtains a hearing.--but it is difficult to preach this
morality of mediocrity! it can never avow what it is and what it
desires! it has to talk of moderation and dignity and duty and brotherly
love--it will have difficulty in concealing its irony!

. there is an instinct for rank which more than anything else is
already the sign of a high rank; there is a delight in the nuances
of reverence which leads one to infer noble origin and habits. the
refinement goodness and loftiness of a soul are put to a perilous test
when something passes by that is of the highest rank but is not
yet protected by the awe of authority from obtrusive touches and
incivilities something that goes its way like a living touchstone
undistinguished undiscovered and tentative perhaps voluntarily veiled
and disguised. he whose task and practice it is to investigate souls
will avail himself of many varieties of this very art to determine the
ultimate value of a soul the unalterable innate order of rank to which
it belongs he will test it by its instinct for reverence. difference
engendre haine the vulgarity of many a nature spurts up suddenly like
dirty water when any holy vessel any jewel from closed shrines any
book bearing the marks of great destiny is brought before it; while
on the other hand there is an involuntary silence a hesitation of the
eye a cessation of all gestures by which it is indicated that a soul
feels the nearness of what is worthiest of respect. the way in which on
the whole the reverence for the bible has hitherto been maintained
in europe is perhaps the best example of discipline and refinement of
manners which europe owes to christianity books of such profoundness
and supreme significance require for their protection an external
tyranny of authority in order to acquire the period of thousands of
years which is necessary to exhaust and unriddle them. much has been
achieved when the sentiment has been at last instilled into the masses
the shallow-pates and the boobies of every kind that they are not
allowed to touch everything that there are holy experiences before
which they must take off their shoes and keep away the unclean hand--it
is almost their highest advance towards humanity. on the contrary in
the so-called cultured classes the believers in modern ideas nothing
is perhaps so repulsive as their lack of shame the easy insolence of
eye and hand with which they touch taste and finger everything; and it
is possible that even yet there is more relative nobility of taste and
more tact for reverence among the people among the lower classes of
the people especially among peasants than among the newspaper-reading
demimonde of intellect the cultured class.

. it cannot be effaced from a mans soul what his ancestors have
preferably and most constantly done whether they were perhaps diligent
economizers attached to a desk and a cash-box modest and citizen-like
in their desires modest also in their virtues; or whether they were
accustomed to commanding from morning till night fond of rude pleasures
and probably of still ruder duties and responsibilities; or whether
finally at one time or another they have sacrificed old privileges of
birth and possession in order to live wholly for their faith--for their
god--as men of an inexorable and sensitive conscience which blushes
at every compromise. it is quite impossible for a man not to have
the qualities and predilections of his parents and ancestors in his
constitution whatever appearances may suggest to the contrary. this is
the problem of race. granted that one knows something of the parents
it is admissible to draw a conclusion about the child any kind
of offensive incontinence any kind of sordid envy or of clumsy
self-vaunting--the three things which together have constituted the
genuine plebeian type in all times--such must pass over to the child as
surely as bad blood; and with the help of the best education and culture
one will only succeed in deceiving with regard to such heredity.--and
what else does education and culture try to do nowadays! in our very
democratic or rather very plebeian age education and culture must
be essentially the art of deceiving--deceiving with regard to origin
with regard to the inherited plebeianism in body and soul. an educator
who nowadays preached truthfulness above everything else and called out
constantly to his pupils be true! be natural! show yourselves as you
are!--even such a virtuous and sincere ass would learn in a short time
to have recourse to the furca of horace naturam expellere with what
results plebeianism usque recurret. footnote horaces epistles
i. x. .

. at the risk of displeasing innocent ears i submit that egoism
belongs to the essence of a noble soul i mean the unalterable belief
that to a being such as we other beings must naturally be in
subjection and have to sacrifice themselves. the noble soul accepts the
fact of his egoism without question and also without consciousness of
harshness constraint or arbitrariness therein but rather as something
that may have its basis in the primary law of things--if he sought a
designation for it he would say it is justice itself. he acknowledges
under certain circumstances which made him hesitate at first that
there are other equally privileged ones; as soon as he has settled this
question of rank he moves among those equals and equally privileged
ones with the same assurance as regards modesty and delicate respect
which he enjoys in intercourse with himself--in accordance with an
innate heavenly mechanism which all the stars understand. it is an
additional instance of his egoism this artfulness and self-limitation
in intercourse with his equals--every star is a similar egoist; he
honours himself in them and in the rights which he concedes to them he
has no doubt that the exchange of honours and rights as the essence of
all intercourse belongs also to the natural condition of things. the
noble soul gives as he takes prompted by the passionate and sensitive
instinct of requital which is at the root of his nature. the notion of
favour has inter pares neither significance nor good repute; there
may be a sublime way of letting gifts as it were light upon one from
above and of drinking them thirstily like dew-drops; but for those
arts and displays the noble soul has no aptitude. his egoism hinders him
here in general he looks aloft unwillingly--he looks either forward
horizontally and deliberately or downwards--he knows that he is on a
height.

. one can only truly esteem him who does not look out for
himself.--goethe to rath schlosser.

. the chinese have a proverb which mothers even teach their children
siao-sin make thy heart small. this is the essentially fundamental
tendency in latter-day civilizations. i have no doubt that an ancient
greek also would first of all remark the self-dwarfing in us europeans
of today--in this respect alone we should immediately be distasteful
to him.

. what after all is ignobleness--words are vocal symbols for
ideas; ideas however are more or less definite mental symbols
for frequently returning and concurring sensations for groups of
sensations. it is not sufficient to use the same words in order to
understand one another we must also employ the same words for the same
kind of internal experiences we must in the end have experiences in
common. on this account the people of one nation understand one another
better than those belonging to different nations even when they use
the same language; or rather when people have lived long together under
similar conditions of climate soil danger requirement toil there
originates therefrom an entity that understands itself--namely a
nation. in all souls a like number of frequently recurring experiences
have gained the upper hand over those occurring more rarely about
these matters people understand one another rapidly and always more
rapidly--the history of language is the history of a process of
abbreviation; on the basis of this quick comprehension people always
unite closer and closer. the greater the danger the greater is the
need of agreeing quickly and readily about what is necessary; not to
misunderstand one another in danger--that is what cannot at all be
dispensed with in intercourse. also in all loves and friendships one has
the experience that nothing of the kind continues when the discovery
has been made that in using the same words one of the two parties has
feelings thoughts intuitions wishes or fears different from those of
the other. the fear of the eternal misunderstanding that is the good
genius which so often keeps persons of different sexes from too
hasty attachments to which sense and heart prompt them--and not some
schopenhauerian genius of the species! whichever groups of sensations
within a soul awaken most readily begin to speak and give the word of
command--these decide as to the general order of rank of its values and
determine ultimately its list of desirable things. a mans estimates of
value betray something of the structure of his soul and wherein it
sees its conditions of life its intrinsic needs. supposing now that
necessity has from all time drawn together only such men as could
express similar requirements and similar experiences by similar symbols
it results on the whole that the easy communicability of need
which implies ultimately the undergoing only of average and common
experiences must have been the most potent of all the forces which
have hitherto operated upon mankind. the more similar the more ordinary
people have always had and are still having the advantage; the more
select more refined more unique and difficultly comprehensible are
liable to stand alone; they succumb to accidents in their isolation and
seldom propagate themselves. one must appeal to immense opposing forces
in order to thwart this natural all-too-natural progressus in simile
the evolution of man to the similar the ordinary the average the
gregarious--to the ignoble--!

. the more a psychologist--a born an unavoidable psychologist
and soul-diviner--turns his attention to the more select cases and
individuals the greater is his danger of being suffocated by sympathy
he needs sternness and cheerfulness more than any other man. for
the corruption the ruination of higher men of the more unusually
constituted souls is in fact the rule it is dreadful to have such a
rule always before ones eyes. the manifold torment of the psychologist
who has discovered this ruination who discovers once and then
discovers almost repeatedly throughout all history this universal
inner desperateness of higher men this eternal too late! in every
sense--may perhaps one day be the cause of his turning with
bitterness against his own lot and of his making an attempt at
self-destruction--of his going to ruin himself. one may perceive
in almost every psychologist a tell-tale inclination for delightful
intercourse with commonplace and well-ordered men; the fact is thereby
disclosed that he always requires healing that he needs a sort
of flight and forgetfulness away from what his insight and
incisiveness--from what his business--has laid upon his conscience.
the fear of his memory is peculiar to him. he is easily silenced by the
judgment of others; he hears with unmoved countenance how people honour
admire love and glorify where he has perceived--or he even conceals
his silence by expressly assenting to some plausible opinion. perhaps
the paradox of his situation becomes so dreadful that precisely
where he has learnt great sympathy together with great contempt the
multitude the educated and the visionaries have on their part learnt
great reverence--reverence for great men and marvelous animals for
the sake of whom one blesses and honours the fatherland the earth the
dignity of mankind and ones own self to whom one points the young
and in view of whom one educates them. and who knows but in all great
instances hitherto just the same happened that the multitude worshipped
a god and that the god was only a poor sacrificial animal! success
has always been the greatest liar--and the work itself is a success;
the great statesman the conqueror the discoverer are disguised in
their creations until they are unrecognizable; the work of the artist
of the philosopher only invents him who has created it is reputed
to have created it; the great men as they are reverenced are poor
little fictions composed afterwards; in the world of historical values
spurious coinage prevails. those great poets for example such as
byron musset poe leopardi kleist gogol i do not venture to mention
much greater names but i have them in my mind as they now appear and
were perhaps obliged to be men of the moment enthusiastic sensuous
and childish light-minded and impulsive in their trust and distrust;
with souls in which usually some flaw has to be concealed; often taking
revenge with their works for an internal defilement often seeking
forgetfulness in their soaring from a too true memory often lost in
the mud and almost in love with it until they become like the
will-o-the-wisps around the swamps and pretend to be stars--the people
then call them idealists--often struggling with protracted disgust
with an ever-reappearing phantom of disbelief which makes them cold
and obliges them to languish for gloria and devour faith as it is
out of the hands of intoxicated adulators--what a torment these great
artists are and the so-called higher men in general to him who has once
found them out! it is thus conceivable that it is just from woman--who
is clairvoyant in the world of suffering and also unfortunately eager
to help and save to an extent far beyond her powers--that they have
learnt so readily those outbreaks of boundless devoted sympathy which
the multitude above all the reverent multitude do not understand
and overwhelm with prying and self-gratifying interpretations. this
sympathizing invariably deceives itself as to its power; woman would
like to believe that love can do everything--it is the superstition
peculiar to her. alas he who knows the heart finds out how poor
helpless pretentious and blundering even the best and deepest love
is--he finds that it rather destroys than saves!--it is possible that
under the holy fable and travesty of the life of jesus there is hidden
one of the most painful cases of the martyrdom of knowledge about love
the martyrdom of the most innocent and most craving heart that
never had enough of any human love that demanded love that demanded
inexorably and frantically to be loved and nothing else with terrible
outbursts against those who refused him their love; the story of a poor
soul insatiated and insatiable in love that had to invent hell to send
thither those who would not love him--and that at last enlightened
about human love had to invent a god who is entire love entire
capacity for love--who takes pity on human love because it is so
paltry so ignorant! he who has such sentiments he who has such
knowledge about love--seeks for death!--but why should one deal with
such painful matters provided of course that one is not obliged to do
so.

. the intellectual haughtiness and loathing of every man who has
suffered deeply--it almost determines the order of rank how deeply men
can suffer--the chilling certainty with which he is thoroughly imbued
and coloured that by virtue of his suffering he knows more than the
shrewdest and wisest can ever know that he has been familiar with
and at home in many distant dreadful worlds of which you know
nothing!--this silent intellectual haughtiness of the sufferer this
pride of the elect of knowledge of the initiated of the almost
sacrificed finds all forms of disguise necessary to protect itself from
contact with officious and sympathizing hands and in general from all
that is not its equal in suffering. profound suffering makes noble
it separates.--one of the most refined forms of disguise is epicurism
along with a certain ostentatious boldness of taste which takes
suffering lightly and puts itself on the defensive against all that
is sorrowful and profound. they are gay men who make use of gaiety
because they are misunderstood on account of it--they wish to be
misunderstood. there are scientific minds who make use of science
because it gives a gay appearance and because scientificness leads to
the conclusion that a person is superficial--they wish to mislead to a
false conclusion. there are free insolent minds which would fain conceal
and deny that they are broken proud incurable hearts the cynicism of
hamlet--the case of galiani; and occasionally folly itself is the mask
of an unfortunate over-assured knowledge.--from which it follows that it
is the part of a more refined humanity to have reverence for the mask
and not to make use of psychology and curiosity in the wrong place.

. that which separates two men most profoundly is a different sense
and grade of purity. what does it matter about all their honesty and
reciprocal usefulness what does it matter about all their mutual
good-will the fact still remains--they cannot smell each other! the
highest instinct for purity places him who is affected with it in the
most extraordinary and dangerous isolation as a saint for it is just
holiness--the highest spiritualization of the instinct in question. any
kind of cognizance of an indescribable excess in the joy of the bath
any kind of ardour or thirst which perpetually impels the soul out
of night into the morning and out of gloom out of affliction into
clearness brightness depth and refinement--just as much as such a
tendency distinguishes--it is a noble tendency--it also separates.--the
pity of the saint is pity for the filth of the human all-too-human.
and there are grades and heights where pity itself is regarded by him as
impurity as filth.

. signs of nobility never to think of lowering our duties to the
rank of duties for everybody; to be unwilling to renounce or to share
our responsibilities; to count our prerogatives and the exercise of
them among our duties.

. a man who strives after great things looks upon every one whom
he encounters on his way either as a means of advance or a delay and
hindrance--or as a temporary resting-place. his peculiar lofty bounty
to his fellow-men is only possible when he attains his elevation and
dominates. impatience and the consciousness of being always condemned
to comedy up to that time--for even strife is a comedy and conceals the
end as every means does--spoil all intercourse for him; this kind of
man is acquainted with solitude and what is most poisonous in it.

. the problem of those who wait.--happy chances are necessary and
many incalculable elements in order that a higher man in whom the
solution of a problem is dormant may yet take action or break forth
as one might say--at the right moment. on an average it does not happen;
and in all corners of the earth there are waiting ones sitting who
hardly know to what extent they are waiting and still less that they
wait in vain. occasionally too the waking call comes too late--the
chance which gives permission to take action--when their best youth
and strength for action have been used up in sitting still; and how many
a one just as he sprang up has found with horror that his limbs are
benumbed and his spirits are now too heavy! it is too late he has
said to himself--and has become self-distrustful and henceforth for ever
useless.--in the domain of genius may not the raphael without
hands taking the expression in its widest sense perhaps not be the
exception but the rule--perhaps genius is by no means so rare but
rather the five hundred hands which it requires in order to tyrannize
over the greek inserted here the right time--in order to take
chance by the forelock!

. he who does not wish to see the height of a man looks all the
more sharply at what is low in him and in the foreground--and thereby
betrays himself.

. in all kinds of injury and loss the lower and coarser soul is
better off than the nobler soul the dangers of the latter must be
greater the probability that it will come to grief and perish is in
fact immense considering the multiplicity of the conditions of its
existence.--in a lizard a finger grows again which has been lost; not so
in man.--

. it is too bad! always the old story! when a man has finished
building his house he finds that he has learnt unawares something
which he ought absolutely to have known before he--began to build. the
eternal fatal too late! the melancholia of everything completed--!

.--wanderer who art thou i see thee follow thy path without scorn
without love with unfathomable eyes wet and sad as a plummet which has
returned to the light insatiated out of every depth--what did it seek
down there--with a bosom that never sighs with lips that conceal their
loathing with a hand which only slowly grasps who art thou what
hast thou done rest thee here this place has hospitality for every
one--refresh thyself! and whoever thou art what is it that now pleases
thee what will serve to refresh thee only name it whatever i have
i offer thee! to refresh me to refresh me oh thou prying one
what sayest thou! but give me i pray thee--- what what speak out!
another mask! a second mask!

. men of profound sadness betray themselves when they are happy they
have a mode of seizing upon happiness as though they would choke and
strangle it out of jealousy--ah they know only too well that it will
flee from them!

. bad! bad! what does he not--go back yes! but you misunderstand
him when you complain about it. he goes back like every one who is about
to make a great spring.

.--will people believe it of me but i insist that they believe it
of me i have always thought very unsatisfactorily of myself and about
myself only in very rare cases only compulsorily always without
delight in the subject ready to digress from myself and always
without faith in the result owing to an unconquerable distrust of the
possibility of self-knowledge which has led me so far as to feel a
contradictio in adjecto even in the idea of direct knowledge which
theorists allow themselves--this matter of fact is almost the most
certain thing i know about myself. there must be a sort of repugnance
in me to believe anything definite about myself.--is there perhaps
some enigma therein probably; but fortunately nothing for my own
teeth.--perhaps it betrays the species to which i belong--but not to
myself as is sufficiently agreeable to me.

.--but what has happened to you--i do not know he said
hesitatingly; perhaps the harpies have flown over my table.--it
sometimes happens nowadays that a gentle sober retiring man becomes
suddenly mad breaks the plates upsets the table shrieks raves
and shocks everybody--and finally withdraws ashamed and raging at
himself--whither for what purpose to famish apart to suffocate with
his memories--to him who has the desires of a lofty and dainty soul
and only seldom finds his table laid and his food prepared the danger
will always be great--nowadays however it is extraordinarily so.
thrown into the midst of a noisy and plebeian age with which he does
not like to eat out of the same dish he may readily perish of hunger
and thirst--or should he nevertheless finally fall to of sudden
nausea.--we have probably all sat at tables to which we did not belong;
and precisely the most spiritual of us who are most difficult to
nourish know the dangerous dyspepsia which originates from a sudden
insight and disillusionment about our food and our messmates--the
after-dinner nausea.

. if one wishes to praise at all it is a delicate and at the
same time a noble self-control to praise only where one does not
agree--otherwise in fact one would praise oneself which is contrary
to good taste--a self-control to be sure which offers excellent
opportunity and provocation to constant misunderstanding. to be able to
allow oneself this veritable luxury of taste and morality one must
not live among intellectual imbeciles but rather among men whose
misunderstandings and mistakes amuse by their refinement--or one will
have to pay dearly for it!--he praises me therefore he acknowledges me
to be right--this asinine method of inference spoils half of the life
of us recluses for it brings the asses into our neighbourhood and
friendship.

. to live in a vast and proud tranquility; always beyond... to have
or not to have ones emotions ones for and against according to
choice; to lower oneself to them for hours; to seat oneself on them as
upon horses and often as upon asses--for one must know how to make
use of their stupidity as well as of their fire. to conserve ones
three hundred foregrounds; also ones black spectacles for there are
circumstances when nobody must look into our eyes still less into our
motives. and to choose for company that roguish and cheerful vice
politeness. and to remain master of ones four virtues courage
insight sympathy and solitude. for solitude is a virtue with us as
a sublime bent and bias to purity which divines that in the contact of
man and man--in society--it must be unavoidably impure. all society
makes one somehow somewhere or sometime--commonplace.

. the greatest events and thoughts--the greatest thoughts however
are the greatest events--are longest in being comprehended the
generations which are contemporary with them do not experience such
events--they live past them. something happens there as in the realm of
stars. the light of the furthest stars is longest in reaching man; and
before it has arrived man denies--that there are stars there. how
many centuries does a mind require to be understood--that is also a
standard one also makes a gradation of rank and an etiquette therewith
such as is necessary for mind and for star.

. here is the prospect free the mind exalted. footnote goethes
faust part ii act v. the words of dr. marianus.--but there is a
reverse kind of man who is also upon a height and has also a free
prospect--but looks downwards.

. what is noble what does the word noble still mean for us
nowadays how does the noble man betray himself how is he recognized
under this heavy overcast sky of the commencing plebeianism by which
everything is rendered opaque and leaden--it is not his actions which
establish his claim--actions are always ambiguous always inscrutable;
neither is it his works. one finds nowadays among artists and scholars
plenty of those who betray by their works that a profound longing for
nobleness impels them; but this very need of nobleness is radically
different from the needs of the noble soul itself and is in fact the
eloquent and dangerous sign of the lack thereof. it is not the works
but the belief which is here decisive and determines the order of
rank--to employ once more an old religious formula with a new and deeper
meaning--it is some fundamental certainty which a noble soul has about
itself something which is not to be sought is not to be found and
perhaps also is not to be lost.--the noble soul has reverence for
itself.--

. there are men who are unavoidably intellectual let them turn
and twist themselves as they will and hold their hands before their
treacherous eyes--as though the hand were not a betrayer; it always
comes out at last that they have something which they hide--namely
intellect. one of the subtlest means of deceiving at least as long as
possible and of successfully representing oneself to be stupider
than one really is--which in everyday life is often as desirable as
an umbrella--is called enthusiasm including what belongs to it for
instance virtue. for as galiani said who was obliged to know it vertu
est enthousiasme.

. in the writings of a recluse one always hears something of the echo
of the wilderness something of the murmuring tones and timid vigilance
of solitude; in his strongest words even in his cry itself there
sounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence of concealment. he who
has sat day and night from years end to years end alone with his
soul in familiar discord and discourse he who has become a cave-bear
or a treasure-seeker or a treasure-guardian and dragon in his cave--it
may be a labyrinth but can also be a gold-mine--his ideas themselves
eventually acquire a twilight-colour of their own and an odour as much
of the depth as of the mould something uncommunicative and repulsive
which blows chilly upon every passer-by. the recluse does not believe
that a philosopher--supposing that a philosopher has always in the first
place been a recluse--ever expressed his actual and ultimate opinions in
books are not books written precisely to hide what is in us--indeed
he will doubt whether a philosopher can have ultimate and actual
opinions at all; whether behind every cave in him there is not and must
necessarily be a still deeper cave an ampler stranger richer
world beyond the surface an abyss behind every bottom beneath every
foundation. every philosophy is a foreground philosophy--this is a
recluses verdict there is something arbitrary in the fact that the
philosopher came to a stand here took a retrospect and looked around;
that he here laid his spade aside and did not dig any deeper--there
is also something suspicious in it. every philosophy also conceals a
philosophy; every opinion is also a lurking-place every word is also a
mask.

. every deep thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being
misunderstood. the latter perhaps wounds his vanity; but the former
wounds his heart his sympathy which always says ah why would you
also have as hard a time of it as i have

. man a complex mendacious artful and inscrutable animal uncanny
to the other animals by his artifice and sagacity rather than by his
strength has invented the good conscience in order finally to enjoy his
soul as something simple; and the whole of morality is a long audacious
falsification by virtue of which generally enjoyment at the sight of
the soul becomes possible. from this point of view there is perhaps much
more in the conception of art than is generally believed.

. a philosopher that is a man who constantly experiences sees
hears suspects hopes and dreams extraordinary things; who is struck
by his own thoughts as if they came from the outside from above and
below as a species of events and lightning-flashes peculiar to him; who
is perhaps himself a storm pregnant with new lightnings; a portentous
man around whom there is always rumbling and mumbling and gaping and
something uncanny going on. a philosopher alas a being who often
runs away from himself is often afraid of himself--but whose curiosity
always makes him come to himself again.

. a man who says i like that i take it for my own and mean to
guard and protect it from every one; a man who can conduct a case
carry out a resolution remain true to an opinion keep hold of a woman
punish and overthrow insolence; a man who has his indignation and his
sword and to whom the weak the suffering the oppressed and even the
animals willingly submit and naturally belong; in short a man who is a
master by nature--when such a man has sympathy well! that sympathy has
value! but of what account is the sympathy of those who suffer! or of
those even who preach sympathy! there is nowadays throughout almost the
whole of europe a sickly irritability and sensitiveness towards pain
and also a repulsive irrestrainableness in complaining an effeminizing
which with the aid of religion and philosophical nonsense seeks
to deck itself out as something superior--there is a regular cult of
suffering. the unmanliness of that which is called sympathy by such
groups of visionaries is always i believe the first thing that
strikes the eye.--one must resolutely and radically taboo this latest
form of bad taste; and finally i wish people to put the good amulet
gai saber gay science in ordinary language on heart and neck as
a protection against it.

. the olympian vice.--despite the philosopher who as a genuine
englishman tried to bring laughter into bad repute in all thinking
minds--laughing is a bad infirmity of human nature which every
thinking mind will strive to overcome hobbes--i would even
allow myself to rank philosophers according to the quality of their
laughing--up to those who are capable of golden laughter. and supposing
that gods also philosophize which i am strongly inclined to believe
owing to many reasons--i have no doubt that they also know how to laugh
thereby in an overman-like and new fashion--and at the expense of all
serious things! gods are fond of ridicule it seems that they cannot
refrain from laughter even in holy matters.

. the genius of the heart as that great mysterious one possesses
it the tempter-god and born rat-catcher of consciences whose voice can
descend into the nether-world of every soul who neither speaks a word
nor casts a glance in which there may not be some motive or touch
of allurement to whose perfection it pertains that he knows how to
appear--not as he is but in a guise which acts as an additional
constraint on his followers to press ever closer to him to follow him
more cordially and thoroughly;--the genius of the heart which imposes
silence and attention on everything loud and self-conceited which
smoothes rough souls and makes them taste a new longing--to lie placid
as a mirror that the deep heavens may be reflected in them;--the genius
of the heart which teaches the clumsy and too hasty hand to hesitate
and to grasp more delicately; which scents the hidden and forgotten
treasure the drop of goodness and sweet spirituality under thick dark
ice and is a divining-rod for every grain of gold long buried and
imprisoned in mud and sand; the genius of the heart from contact with
which every one goes away richer; not favoured or surprised not as
though gratified and oppressed by the good things of others; but richer
in himself newer than before broken up blown upon and sounded by a
thawing wind; more uncertain perhaps more delicate more fragile more
bruised but full of hopes which as yet lack names full of a new will
and current full of a new ill-will and counter-current... but what am i
doing my friends of whom am i talking to you have i forgotten myself
so far that i have not even told you his name unless it be that you
have already divined of your own accord who this questionable god
and spirit is that wishes to be praised in such a manner for as it
happens to every one who from childhood onward has always been on his
legs and in foreign lands i have also encountered on my path many
strange and dangerous spirits; above all however and again and again
the one of whom i have just spoken in fact no less a personage than
the god dionysus the great equivocator and tempter to whom as you
know i once offered in all secrecy and reverence my first-fruits--the
last as it seems to me who has offered a sacrifice to him for i
have found no one who could understand what i was then doing. in
the meantime however i have learned much far too much about the
philosophy of this god and as i said from mouth to mouth--i the last
disciple and initiate of the god dionysus and perhaps i might at last
begin to give you my friends as far as i am allowed a little taste of
this philosophy in a hushed voice as is but seemly for it has to do
with much that is secret new strange wonderful and uncanny. the
very fact that dionysus is a philosopher and that therefore gods also
philosophize seems to me a novelty which is not unensnaring and might
perhaps arouse suspicion precisely among philosophers;--among you my
friends there is less to be said against it except that it comes too
late and not at the right time; for as it has been disclosed to me you
are loth nowadays to believe in god and gods. it may happen too that
in the frankness of my story i must go further than is agreeable to the
strict usages of your ears certainly the god in question went further
very much further in such dialogues and was always many paces ahead of
me... indeed if it were allowed i should have to give him according
to human usage fine ceremonious tides of lustre and merit i should
have to extol his courage as investigator and discoverer his fearless
honesty truthfulness and love of wisdom. but such a god does not know
what to do with all that respectable trumpery and pomp. keep that he
would say for thyself and those like thee and whoever else require
it! i--have no reason to cover my nakedness! one suspects that this
kind of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame--he once said
under certain circumstances i love mankind--and referred thereby to
ariadne who was present; in my opinion man is an agreeable brave
inventive animal that has not his equal upon earth he makes his way
even through all labyrinths. i like man and often think how i can
still further advance him and make him stronger more evil and more
profound.--stronger more evil and more profound i asked in horror.
yes he said again stronger more evil and more profound; also more
beautiful--and thereby the tempter-god smiled with his halcyon smile
as though he had just paid some charming compliment. one here sees at
once that it is not only shame that this divinity lacks;--and in general
there are good grounds for supposing that in some things the gods could
all of them come to us men for instruction. we men are--more human.--

. alas! what are you after all my written and painted thoughts! not
long ago you were so variegated young and malicious so full of thorns
and secret spices that you made me sneeze and laugh--and now you
have already doffed your novelty and some of you i fear are ready
to become truths so immortal do they look so pathetically honest so
tedious! and was it ever otherwise what then do we write and paint
we mandarins with chinese brush we immortalisers of things which lend
themselves to writing what are we alone capable of painting alas only
that which is just about to fade and begins to lose its odour! alas
only exhausted and departing storms and belated yellow sentiments! alas
only birds strayed and fatigued by flight which now let themselves be
captured with the hand--with our hand! we immortalize what cannot live
and fly much longer things only which are exhausted and mellow! and it
is only for your afternoon you my written and painted thoughts for
which alone i have colours many colours perhaps many variegated
softenings and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds;--but
nobody will divine thereby how ye looked in your morning you sudden
sparks and marvels of my solitude you my old beloved--evil thoughts!




from the heights

by f w nietzsche

translated by l. a. magnus


                       .

     midday of life! oh season of delight!
                      my summers park!
     uneaseful joy to look to lurk to hark--
     i peer for friends am ready day and night--
     where linger ye my friends the time is right!

                       .

     is not the glaciers grey today for you
                         rose-garlanded
     the brooklet seeks you wind cloud with longing thread
     and thrust themselves yet higher to the blue
     to spy for you from farthest eagles view.

                       .

     my table was spread out for you on high--
                      who dwelleth so
     star-near so near the grisly pit below--
     my realm--what realm hath wider boundary
     my honey--who hath sipped its fragrancy

                       .

     friends ye are there! woe me--yet i am not
                        he whom ye seek
     ye stare and stop--better your wrath could speak!
     i am not i hand gait face changed and what
     i am to you my friends now am i not

                       .

     am i an other strange am i to me
                      yet from me sprung
     a wrestler by himself too oft self-wrung
     hindering too oft my own selfs potency
     wounded and hampered by self-victory

                       .

     i sought where-so the wind blows keenest. there
                     i learned to dwell
     where no man dwells on lonesome ice-lorn fell
     and unlearned man and god and curse and prayer
     became a ghost haunting the glaciers bare

                       .

     ye my old friends! look! ye turn pale filled oer
                      with love and fear!
     go! yet not in wrath. ye could neer live here.
     here in the farthest realm of ice and scaur
     a huntsman must one be like chamois soar.

                       .

     an evil huntsman was i see how taut
                    my bow was bent!
     strongest was he by whom such bolt were sent--
     woe now! that arrow is with peril fraught
     perilous as none.--have yon safe home ye sought!

                       .

     ye go! thou didst endure enough oh heart;--
                     strong was thy hope;
     unto new friends thy portals widely ope
     let old ones be. bid memory depart!
     wast thou young then now--better young thou art!

                       .

     what linked us once together one hopes tie--
                    who now doth con
     those lines now fading love once wrote thereon--
     is like a parchment which the hand is shy
     to touch--like crackling leaves all seared all dry.

                       .

     oh! friends no more! they are--what name for those--
                           friends phantom-flight
     knocking at my hearts window-pane at night
     gazing on me that speaks we were and goes--
     oh withered words once fragrant as the rose!

                       .

     pinings of youth that might not understand!
                       for which i pined
     which i deemed changed with me kin of my kind
     but they grew old and thus were doomed and banned
     none but new kith are native of my land!

                       .

     midday of life! my second youths delight!
                       my summers park!
     unrestful joy to long to lurk to hark!
     i peer for friends!--am ready day and night
     for my new friends. come! come! the time is right!

                       .

     this song is done--the sweet sad cry of rue
                       sang out its end;
     a wizard wrought it he the timely friend
     the midday-friend--no do not ask me who;
     at midday twas when one became as two.

                       .

     we keep our feast of feasts sure of our bourne
                      our aims self-same
     the guest of guests friend zarathustra came!
     the world now laughs the grisly veil was torn
     and light and dark were one that wedding-morn.

preface.




it is often enough and always with great surprise intimated to me that
there is something both ordinary and unusual in all my writings from
the birth of tragedy to the recently published prelude to a
philosophy of the future they all contain i have been told snares
and nets for short sighted birds and something that is almost a
constant subtle incitement to an overturning of habitual opinions and
of approved customs. what! everything is merely--human--all too human
with this exclamation my writings are gone through not without a
certain dread and mistrust of ethic itself and not without a disposition
to ask the exponent of evil things if those things be not simply
misrepresented. my writings have been termed a school of distrust still
more of disdain also and more happily of courage audacity even. and
in fact i myself do not believe that anybody ever looked into the world
with a distrust as deep as mine seeming as i do not simply the timely
advocate of the devil but to employ theological terms an enemy and
challenger of god; and whosoever has experienced any of the consequences
of such deep distrust anything of the chills and the agonies of
isolation to which such an unqualified difference of standpoint condemns
him endowed with it will also understand how often i must have sought
relief and self-forgetfulness from any source--through any object of
veneration or enmity of scientific seriousness or wanton lightness;
also why i when i could not find what i was in need of had to fashion
it for myself counterfeiting it or imagining it and what poet or
writer has ever done anything else and what other purpose can all the
art in the world possibly have that which i always stood most in need
of in order to effect my cure and self-recovery was faith faith enough
not to be thus isolated not to look at life from so singular a point of
view--a magic apprehension in eye and mind of relationship and
equality a calm confidence in friendship a blindness free from
suspicion and questioning to two sidedness; a pleasure in externals
superficialities the near the accessible in all things possessed of
color skin and seeming. perhaps i could be fairly reproached with much
art in this regard many fine counterfeitings; for example that
wisely or wilfully i had shut my eyes to schopenhauers blind will
towards ethic at a time when i was already clear sighted enough on the
subject of ethic; likewise that i had deceived myself concerning richard
wagners incurable romanticism as if it were a beginning and not an
end; likewise concerning the greeks likewise concerning the germans and
their future--and there may be perhaps a long list of such likewises.
granted however that all this were true and with justice urged
against me what does it signify what can it signify in regard to how
much of the self-sustaining capacity how much of reason and higher
protection are embraced in such self-deception--and how much more
falsity is still necessary to me that i may therewith always reassure
myself regarding the luxury of my truth. enough i still live; and life
is not considered now apart from ethic; it _will_ have deception; it
thrives lebt on deception ... but am i not beginning to do all over
again what i have always done i the old immoralist and bird
snarer--talk unmorally ultramorally beyond good and evil




thus then have i evolved for myself the free spirits to whom this
discouraging-encouraging work under the general title human all too
human is dedicated. such free spirits do not really exist and never
did exist. but i stood in need of them as i have pointed out in order
that some good might be mixed with my evils illness loneliness
strangeness _acedia_ incapacity to serve as gay spirits and
comrades with whom one may talk and laugh when one is disposed to talk
and laugh and whom one may send to the devil when they grow wearisome.
they are some compensation for the lack of friends. that such free
spirits can possibly exist that our europe will yet number among her
sons of to-morrow or of the day after to-morrow such a brilliant and
enthusiastic company alive and palpable and not merely as in my case
fantasms and imaginary shades i myself can by no means doubt. i see
them already coming slowly slowly. may it not be that i am doing a
little something to expedite their coming when i describe in advance the
influences under which i see them evolving and the ways along which they
travel




it may be conjectured that a soul in which the type of free spirit can
attain maturity and completeness had its decisive and deciding event in
the form of a great emancipation or unbinding and that prior to that
event it seemed only the more firmly and forever chained to its place
and pillar. what binds strongest what cords seem almost unbreakable in
the case of mortals of a choice and lofty nature they will be those of
duty that reverence which in youth is most typical that timidity and
tenderness in the presence of the traditionally honored and the worthy
that gratitude to the soil from which we sprung for the hand that
guided us for the relic before which we were taught to pray--their
sublimest moments will themselves bind these souls most strongly. the
great liberation comes suddenly to such prisoners like an earthquake
the young soul is all at once shaken torn apart cast forth--it
comprehends not itself what is taking place. an involuntary onward
impulse rules them with the mastery of command; a will a wish are
developed to go forward anywhere at any price; a strong dangerous
curiosity regarding an undiscovered world flames and flashes in all
their being. better to die than live _here_--so sounds the tempting
voice and this here this at home constitutes all they have
hitherto loved. a sudden dread and distrust of that which they loved a
flash of contempt for that which is called their duty a mutinous
wilful volcanic-like longing for a far away journey strange scenes and
people annihilation petrifaction a hatred surmounting love perhaps a
sacrilegious impulse and look backwards to where they so long prayed
and loved perhaps a flush of shame for what they did and at the same
time an exultation at having done it an inner intoxicating
delightful tremor in which is betrayed the sense of victory--a victory
over what over whom a riddle-like victory fruitful in questioning and
well worth questioning but the _first_ victory for all--such things of
pain and ill belong to the history of the great liberation. and it is at
the same time a malady that can destroy a man this first outbreak of
strength and will for self-destination self-valuation this will for
free will and how much illness is forced to the surface in the frantic
strivings and singularities with which the freedman the liberated seeks
henceforth to attest his mastery over things! he roves fiercely around
with an unsatisfied longing and whatever objects he may encounter must
suffer from the perilous expectancy of his pride; he tears to pieces
whatever attracts him. with a sardonic laugh he overturns whatever he
finds veiled or protected by any reverential awe he would see what
these things look like when they are overturned. it is wilfulness and
delight in the wilfulness of it if he now perhaps gives his approval
to that which has heretofore been in ill repute--if in curiosity and
experiment he penetrates stealthily to the most forbidden things. in
the background during all his plunging and roaming--for he is as
restless and aimless in his course as if lost in a wilderness--is the
interrogation mark of a curiosity growing ever more dangerous. can we
not upset every standard and is good perhaps evil and god only an
invention and a subtlety of the devil is everything in the last
resort false and if we are dupes are we not on that very account
dupers also _must_ we not be dupers also such reflections lead and
mislead him ever further on ever further away. solitude that dread
goddess and mater saeva cupidinum encircles and besets him ever more
threatening more violent more heart breaking--but who to-day knows
what solitude is




from this morbid solitude from the deserts of such trial years the way
is yet far to that great overflowing certainty and healthiness which
cannot dispense even with sickness as a means and a grappling hook of
knowledge; to that matured freedom of the spirit which is in an equal
degree self mastery and discipline of the heart and gives access to
the path of much and various reflection--to that inner comprehensiveness
and self satisfaction of over-richness which precludes all danger that
the spirit has gone astray even in its own path and is sitting
intoxicated in some corner or other; to that overplus of plastic
healing imitative and restorative power which is the very sign of
vigorous health that overplus which confers upon the free spirit the
perilous prerogative of spending a life in experiment and of running
adventurous risks the past-master-privilege of the free spirit. in the
interval there may be long years of convalescence years filled with
many hued painfully-bewitching transformations dominated and led to the
goal by a tenacious will for health that is often emboldened to assume
the guise and the disguise of health. there is a middle ground to this
which a man of such destiny can not subsequently recall without emotion;
he basks in a special fine sun of his own with a feeling of birdlike
freedom birdlike visual power birdlike irrepressibleness a something
extraneous drittes in which curiosity and delicate disdain have
united. a free spirit--this refreshing term is grateful in any mood
it almost sets one aglow. one lives--no longer in the bonds of love and
hate without a yes or no here or there indifferently best pleased to
evade to avoid to beat about neither advancing nor retreating. one is
habituated to the bad like a person who all at once sees a fearful
hurly-burly _beneath_ him--and one was the counterpart of him who
bothers himself with things that do not concern him. as a matter of fact
the free spirit is bothered with mere things--and how many
things--which no longer _concern_ him.




a step further in recovery and the free spirit draws near to life
again slowly indeed almost refractorily almost distrustfully. there
is again warmth and mellowness feeling and fellow feeling acquire
depth lambent airs stir all about him. he almost feels it seems as if
now for the first time his eyes are open to things _near_. he is in
amaze and sits hushed for where had he been these near and immediate
things how changed they seem to him! he looks gratefully back--grateful
for his wandering his self exile and severity his lookings afar and
his bird flights in the cold heights. how fortunate that he has not
like a sensitive dull home body remained always in the house and at
home! he had been beside himself beyond a doubt. now for the first
time he really sees himself--and what surprises in the process. what
hitherto unfelt tremors! yet what joy in the exhaustion the old
sickness the relapses of the convalescent! how it delights him
suffering to sit still to exercise patience to lie in the sun! who so
well as he appreciates the fact that there comes balmy weather even in
winter who delights more in the sunshine athwart the wall they are
the most appreciative creatures in the world and also the most humble
these convalescents and lizards crawling back towards life there are
some among them who can let no day slip past them without addressing
some song of praise to its retreating light. and speaking seriously it
is a fundamental cure for all pessimism the cankerous vice as is well
known of all idealists and humbugs to become ill in the manner of
these free spirits to remain ill quite a while and then bit by bit grow
healthy--i mean healthier. it is wisdom worldly wisdom to administer
even health to oneself for a long time in small doses.




about this time it becomes at last possible amid the flash lights of a
still unestablished still precarious health for the free the ever
freer spirit to begin to read the riddle of that great liberation a
riddle which has hitherto lingered obscure well worth questioning
almost impalpable in his memory. if once he hardly dared to ask why so
apart so alone renouncing all i loved renouncing respect itself why
this coldness this suspicion this hate for ones very virtues--now
he dares and asks it loudly already hearing the answer you had to
become master over yourself master of your own good qualities. formerly
they were your masters but they should be merely your tools along with
other tools. you had to acquire power over your aye and no and learn to
hold and withhold them in accordance with your higher aims. you had to
grasp the perspective of every representation werthschtzung--the
dislocation distortion and the apparent end or teleology of the
horizon besides whatever else appertains to the perspective also the
element of demerit in its relation to opposing merit and the whole
intellectual cost of every affirmative every negative. you had to find
out the _inevitable_ error in every yes and in every no error as
inseparable from life life itself as conditioned by the perspective and
its inaccuracy. above all you had to see with your own eyes where
the error is always greatest there namely where life is littlest
narrowest meanest least developed and yet cannot help looking upon
itself as the goal and standard of things and smugly and ignobly and
incessantly tearing to tatters all that is highest and greatest and
richest and putting the shreds into the form of questions from the
standpoint of its own well being. you had to see with your own eyes the
problem of classification rangordnung regulation concerning rank and
station and how strength and sweep and reach of perspective wax upward
together you had--enough the free spirit knows henceforward which
you had it has obeyed and also what it now can do and what it now for
the first time _dare_.

 ungerechtigkeit literally wrongfulness injustice unrighteousness.




accordingly the free spirit works out for itself an answer to that
riddle of its liberation and concludes by generalizing upon its
experience in the following fashion what i went through everyone must
go through in whom any problem is germinated and strives to body itself
forth. the inner power and inevitability of this problem will assert
themselves in due course as in the case of any unsuspected
pregnancy--long before the spirit has seen this problem in its true
aspect and learned to call it by its right name. our destiny exercises
its influence over us even when as yet we have not learned its nature
it is our future that lays down the law to our to-day. granted that it
is the problem of classification of which we free spirits may say
this is _our_ problem yet it is only now in the midday of our life
that we fully appreciate what preparations shifts trials ordeals
stages were essential to that problem before it could emerge to our
view and why we had to go through the various and contradictory
longings and satisfactions of body and soul as circumnavigators and
adventurers of that inner world called man; as surveyors of that
higher and of that progression that is also called
man--crowding in everywhere almost without fear disdaining nothing
missing nothing testing everything sifting everything and eliminating
the chance impurities--until at last we could say we free spirits
here--a _new_ problem! here a long ladder on the rungs of which we
ourselves have rested and risen which we have actually been at times.
here is a something higher a something deeper a something below us a
vastly extensive order ordnung a comparative classification
rangordnung that we perceive here--_our_ problem!

 rangordnung the meaning is the problem of grasping the relative
importance of things.

 uebereinander one over another.




to what stage in the development just outlined the present book belongs
or is assigned is something that will be hidden from no augur or
psychologist for an instant. but where are there psychologists to-day
in france certainly; in russia perhaps; certainly not in germany.
grounds are not wanting to be sure upon which the germans of to-day
may adduce this fact to their credit unhappily for one who in this
matter is fashioned and mentored in an un-german school! this _german_
book which has found its readers in a wide circle of lands and
peoples--it has been some ten years on its rounds--and which must make
its way by means of any musical art and tune that will captivate the
foreign ear as well as the native--this book has been read most
indifferently in germany itself and little heeded there to what is that
due it requires too much i have been told it addresses itself to
men free from the press of petty obligations it demands fine and
trained perceptions it requires a surplus a surplus of time of the
lightness of heaven and of the heart of otium in the most unrestricted
sense mere good things that we germans of to-day have not got and
therefore cannot give. after so graceful a retort my philosophy bids
me be silent and ask no more questions at times as the proverb says
one remains a philosopher only because one says--nothing!

nice spring .




of the first and last things.




=chemistry of the notions and the feelings.=--philosophical problems in
almost all their aspects present themselves in the same interrogative
formula now that they did two thousand years ago how can a thing
develop out of its antithesis for example the reasonable from the
non-reasonable the animate from the inanimate the logical from the
illogical altruism from egoism disinterestedness from greed truth
from error the metaphysical philosophy formerly steered itself clear of
this difficulty to such extent as to repudiate the evolution of one
thing from another and to assign a miraculous origin to what it deemed
highest and best due to the very nature and being of the
thing-in-itself. the historical philosophy on the other hand which
can no longer be viewed apart from physical science the youngest of all
philosophical methods discovered experimentally and its results will
probably always be the same that there is no antithesis whatever
except in the usual exaggerations of popular or metaphysical
comprehension and that an error of the reason is at the bottom of such
contradiction. according to its explanation there is strictly
speaking neither unselfish conduct nor a wholly disinterested point of
view. both are simply sublimations in which the basic element seems
almost evaporated and betrays its presence only to the keenest
observation. all that we need and that could possibly be given us in the
present state of development of the sciences is a chemistry of the
moral religious aesthetic conceptions and feeling as well as of those
emotions which we experience in the affairs great and small of society
and civilization and which we are sensible of even in solitude. but
what if this chemistry established the fact that even in _its_ domain
the most magnificent results were attained with the basest and most
despised ingredients would many feel disposed to continue such
investigations mankind loves to put by the questions of its origin and
beginning must one not be almost inhuman in order to follow the
opposite course




=the traditional error of philosophers.=--all philosophers make the
common mistake of taking contemporary man as their starting point and of
trying through an analysis of him to reach a conclusion. man
involuntarily presents himself to them as an aeterna veritas as a
passive element in every hurly-burly as a fixed standard of things. yet
everything uttered by the philosopher on the subject of man is in the
last resort nothing more than a piece of testimony concerning man
during a very limited period of time. lack of the historical sense is
the traditional defect in all philosophers. many innocently take man in
his most childish state as fashioned through the influence of certain
religious and even of certain political developments as the permanent
form under which man must be viewed. they will not learn that man has
evolved that the intellectual faculty itself is an evolution
whereas some philosophers make the whole cosmos out of this intellectual
faculty. but everything essential in human evolution took place aeons
ago long before the four thousand years or so of which we know
anything during these man may not have changed very much. however the
philosopher ascribes instinct to contemporary man and assumes that
this is one of the unalterable facts regarding man himself and hence
affords a clue to the understanding of the universe in general. the
whole teleology is so planned that man during the last four thousand
years shall be spoken of as a being existing from all eternity and
with reference to whom everything in the cosmos from its very inception
is naturally ordered. yet everything evolved there are no eternal facts
as there are no absolute truths. accordingly historical philosophising
is henceforth indispensable and with it honesty of judgment.

 geworden.




=appreciation of simple truths.=--it is the characteristic of an
advanced civilization to set a higher value upon little simple truths
ascertained by scientific method than upon the pleasing and magnificent
errors originating in metaphysical and sthetical epochs and peoples. to
begin with the former are spoken of with contempt as if there could be
no question of comparison respecting them so rigid homely prosaic and
even discouraging is the aspect of the first while so beautiful
decorative intoxicating and perhaps beatific appear the last named.
nevertheless the hardwon the certain the lasting and therefore the
fertile in new knowledge is the higher; to hold fast to it is manly and
evinces courage directness endurance. and not only individual men but
all mankind will by degrees be uplifted to this manliness when they are
finally habituated to the proper appreciation of tenable enduring
knowledge and have lost all faith in inspiration and in the miraculous
revelation of truth. the reverers of forms indeed with their standards
of beauty and taste may have good reason to laugh when the appreciation
of little truths and the scientific spirit begin to prevail but that
will be only because their eyes are not yet opened to the charm of the
utmost simplicity of form or because men though reared in the rightly
appreciative spirit will still not be fully permeated by it so that
they continue unwittingly imitating ancient forms and that ill enough
as anybody does who no longer feels any interest in a thing. formerly
the mind was not brought into play through the medium of exact thought.
its serious business lay in the working out of forms and symbols. that
has now changed. any seriousness in symbolism is at present the
indication of a deficient education. as our very acts become more
intellectual our tendencies more rational and our judgment for
example as to what seems reasonable is very different from what it was
a hundred years ago so the forms of our lives grow ever more
intellectual and to the old fashioned eye perhaps uglier but only
because it cannot see that the richness of inner rational beauty always
spreads and deepens and that the inner rational aspect of all things
should now be of more consequence to us than the most beautiful
externality and the most exquisite limning.




=astrology and the like.=--it is presumable that the objects of the
religious moral aesthetic and logical notions pertain simply to the
superficialities of things although man flatters himself with the
thought that here at least he is getting to the heart of the cosmos. he
deceives himself because these things have power to make him so happy
and so wretched and so he evinces in this respect the same conceit
that characterises astrology. astrology presupposes that the heavenly
bodies are regulated in their movements in harmony with the destiny of
mortals the moral man presupposes that that which concerns himself most
nearly must also be the heart and soul of things.




=misconception of dreams.=--in the dream mankind in epochs of crude
primitive civilization thought they were introduced to a second
substantial world here we have the source of all metaphysic. without
the dream men would never have been incited to an analysis of the
world. even the distinction between soul and body is wholly due to the
primitive conception of the dream as also the hypothesis of the
embodied soul whence the development of all superstition and also
probably the belief in god. the dead still live for they appear to
the living in dreams. so reasoned mankind at one time and through many
thousands of years.




=the scientific spirit prevails only partially not wholly.=--the
specialized minutest departments of science are dealt with purely
objectively. but the general universal sciences considered as a great
basic unity posit the question--truly a very living question-- to what
purpose what is the use because of this reference to utility they are
as a whole less impersonal than when looked at in their specialized
aspects. now in the case of philosophy as forming the apex of the
scientific pyramid this question of the utility of knowledge is
necessarily brought very conspicuously forward so that every philosophy
has unconsciously the air of ascribing the highest utility to itself.
it is for this reason that all philosophies contain such a great amount
of high flying metaphysic and such a shrinking from the seeming
insignificance of the deliverances of physical science for the
significance of knowledge in relation to life must be made to appear as
great as possible. this constitutes the antagonism between the
specialties of science and philosophy. the latter aims as art aims at
imparting to life and conduct the utmost depth and significance in the
former mere knowledge is sought and nothing else--whatever else be
incidentally obtained. heretofore there has never been a philosophical
system in which philosophy itself was not made the apologist of
knowledge in the abstract. on this point at least each is optimistic
and insists that to knowledge the highest utility must be ascribed. they
are all under the tyranny of logic which is from its very nature
optimism.




=the discordant element in science.=--philosophy severed itself from
science when it put the question what is that knowledge of the world
and of life through which mankind may be made happiest this happened
when the socratic school arose with the standpoint of _happiness_ the
arteries of investigating science were compressed too tightly to permit
of any circulation of the blood--and are so compressed to-day.




=pneumatic explanation of nature.=--metaphysic reads the message of
nature as if it were written purely pneumatically as the church and its
learned ones formerly did where the bible was concerned. it requires a
great deal of expertness to apply to nature the same strict science of
interpretation that the philologists have devised for all literature
and to apply it for the purpose of a simple direct interpretation of
the message and at the same time not bring out a double meaning. but
as in the case of books and literature errors of exposition are far
from being completely eliminated and vestiges of allegorical and
mystical interpretations are still to be met with in the most cultivated
circles so where nature is concerned the case is--actually much worse.

 pneumatic is here used in the sense of spiritual. pneuma being the
greek word in the new testament for the holy spirit.--ed.




=metaphysical world.=--it is true there may be a metaphysical world;
the absolute possibility of it can scarcely be disputed. we see all
things through the medium of the human head and we cannot well cut off
this head although there remains the question what part of the world
would be left after it had been cut off. but that is a purely abstract
scientific problem and one not much calculated to give men uneasiness
yet everything that has heretofore made metaphysical assumptions
valuable fearful or delightful to men all that gave rise to them is
passion error and self deception the worst systems of knowledge not
the best pin their tenets of belief thereto. when such methods are once
brought to view as the basis of all existing religions and metaphysics
they are already discredited. there always remains however the
possibility already conceded but nothing at all can be made out of
that to say not a word about letting happiness salvation and life hang
upon the threads spun from such a possibility. accordingly nothing
could be predicated of the metaphysical world beyond the fact that it is
an elsewhere another sphere inaccessible and incomprehensible to
us it would become a thing of negative properties. even were the
existence of such a world absolutely established it would nevertheless
remain incontrovertible that of all kinds of knowledge knowledge of
such a world would be of least consequence--of even less consequence
than knowledge of the chemical analysis of water would be to a storm
tossed mariner.

 anderssein.




=the harmlessness of metaphysic in the future.=--as soon as religion
art and ethics are so understood that a full comprehension of them can
be gained without taking refuge in the postulates of metaphysical
claptrap at any point in the line of reasoning there will be a complete
cessation of interest in the purely theoretical problem of the thing in
itself and the phenomenon. for here too the same truth applies in
religion art and ethics we are not concerned with the essence of the
cosmos. we are in the sphere of pure conception. no presentiment or
intuition can carry us any further. with perfect tranquility the
question of how our conception of the world could differ so sharply from
the actual world as it is manifest to us will be relegated to the
physiological sciences and to the history of the evolution of ideas and
organisms.

 wesen der welt an sich.




=language as a presumptive science.=--the importance of language in the
development of civilization consists in the fact that by means of it
man placed one world his own alongside another a place of leverage
that he thought so firm as to admit of his turning the rest of the
cosmos on a pivot that he might master it. in so far as man for ages
looked upon mere ideas and names of things as upon aeternae veritates
he evinced the very pride with which he raised himself above the brute.
he really supposed that in language he possessed a knowledge of the
cosmos. the language builder was not so modest as to believe that he was
only giving names to things. on the contrary he thought he embodied the
highest wisdom concerning things in mere words; and in truth
language is the first movement in all strivings for wisdom. here too
it is _faith in ascertained truth_ from which the mightiest fountains
of strength have flowed. very tardily--only now--it dawns upon men that
they have propagated a monstrous error in their belief in language.
fortunately it is too late now to arrest and turn back the evolutionary
process of the reason which had its inception in this belief. logic
itself rests upon assumptions to which nothing in the world of reality
corresponds. for example the correspondence of certain things to one
another and the identity of those things at different periods of time
are assumptions pure and simple but the science of logic originated in
the positive belief that they were not assumptions at all but
established facts. it is the same with the science of mathematics which
certainly would never have come into existence if mankind had known from
the beginning that in all nature there is no perfectly straight line no
true circle no standard of measurement.

 glaube an die gefundene wahrheit as distinguished from faith in
what is taken on trust as truth.




=dream and civilization.=--the function of the brain which is most
encroached upon in slumber is the memory; not that it is wholly
suspended but it is reduced to a state of imperfection as in primitive
ages of mankind was probably the case with everyone whether waking or
sleeping. uncontrolled and entangled as it is it perpetually confuses
things as a result of the most trifling similarities yet in the same
mental confusion and lack of control the nations invented their
mythologies while nowadays travelers habitually observe how prone the
savage is to forgetfulness how his mind after the least exertion of
memory begins to wander and lose itself until finally he utters
falsehood and nonsense from sheer exhaustion. yet in dreams we all
resemble this savage. inadequacy of distinction and error of comparison
are the basis of the preposterous things we do and say in dreams so
that when we clearly recall a dream we are startled that so much idiocy
lurks within us. the absolute distinctness of all dream-images due to
implicit faith in their substantial reality recalls the conditions in
which earlier mankind were placed for whom hallucinations had
extraordinary vividness entire communities and even entire nations
laboring simultaneously under them. therefore in sleep and in dream we
make the pilgrimage of early mankind over again.




=logic of the dream.=--during sleep the nervous system through various
inner provocatives is in constant agitation. almost all the organs act
independently and vigorously. the blood circulates rapidly. the posture
of the sleeper compresses some portions of the body. the coverlets
influence the sensations in different ways. the stomach carries on the
digestive process and acts upon other organs thereby. the intestines are
in motion. the position of the head induces unaccustomed action. the
feet shoeless no longer pressing the ground are the occasion of other
sensations of novelty as is indeed the changed garb of the entire
body. all these things following the bustle and change of the day
result through their novelty in a movement throughout the entire
system that extends even to the brain functions. thus there are a
hundred circumstances to induce perplexity in the mind a questioning as
to the cause of this excitation. now the dream is a _seeking and
presenting of reasons_ for these excitations of feeling of the supposed
reasons that is to say. thus for example whoever has his feet bound
with two threads will probably dream that a pair of serpents are coiled
about his feet. this is at first a hypothesis then a belief with an
accompanying imaginative picture and the argument these snakes must be
the _causa_ of those sensations which i the sleeper now have. so
reasons the mind of the sleeper. the conditions precedent as thus
conjectured become owing to the excitation of the fancy present
realities. everyone knows from experience how a dreamer will transform
one piercing sound for example that of a bell into another of quite a
different nature say the report of cannon. in his dream he becomes
aware first of the effects which he explains by a subsequent hypothesis
and becomes persuaded of the purely conjectural nature of the sound. but
how comes it that the mind of the dreamer goes so far astray when the
same mind awake is habitually cautious careful and so conservative
in its dealings with hypotheses why does the first plausible
hypothesis of the cause of a sensation gain credit in the dreaming
state for in a dream we look upon that dream as reality that is we
accept our hypotheses as fully established. i have no doubt that as men
argue in their dreams to-day mankind argued even in their waking
moments for thousands of years the first _causa_ that occurred to the
mind with reference to anything that stood in need of explanation was
accepted as the true explanation and served as such. savages show the
same tendency in operation as the reports of travelers agree. in the
dream this atavistic relic of humanity manifests its existence within
us for it is the foundation upon which the higher rational faculty
developed itself and still develops itself in every individual. dreams
carry us back to the earlier stages of human culture and afford us a
means of understanding it more clearly. dream thought comes so easily to
us now because we are so thoroughly trained to it through the
interminable stages of evolution during which this fanciful and facile
form of theorising has prevailed. to a certain extent the dream is a
restorative for the brain which during the day is called upon to meet
the many demands for trained thought made upon it by the conditions of a
higher civilization.--we may if we please become sensible even in our
waking moments of a condition that is as a door and vestibule to
dreaming. if we close our eyes the brain immediately conjures up a
medley of impressions of light and color apparently a sort of imitation
and echo of the impressions forced in upon the brain during its waking
moments. and now the mind in co-operation with the imagination
transforms this formless play of light and color into definite figures
moving groups landscapes. what really takes place is a sort of
reasoning from effect back to cause. as the brain inquires whence these
impressions of light and color it posits as the inducing causes of such
lights and colors those shapes and figures. they serve the brain as the
occasions of those lights and colors because the brain when the eyes
are open and the senses awake is accustomed to perceiving the cause of
every impression of light and color made upon it. here again the
imagination is continually interposing its images inasmuch as it
participates in the production of the impressions made through the
senses day by day and the dream-fancy does exactly the same thing--that
is the presumed cause is determined from the effect and _after_ the
effect all this too with extraordinary rapidity so that in this
matter as in a matter of jugglery or sleight-of-hand a confusion of
the mind is produced and an after effect is made to appear a
simultaneous action an inverted succession of events even.--from
these considerations we can see how _late_ strict logical thought the
true notion of cause and effect must have been in developing since our
intellectual and rational faculties to this very day revert to these
primitive processes of deduction while practically half our lifetime is
spent in the super-inducing conditions.--even the poet the artist
ascribes to his sentimental and emotional states causes which are not
the true ones. to that extent he is a reminder of early mankind and can
aid us in its comprehension.




=association.=--all strong feelings are associated with a variety of
allied sentiments and emotions. they stir up the memory at the same
time. when we are under their influence we are reminded of similar
states and we feel a renewal of them within us. thus are formed habitual
successions of feelings and notions which at last when they follow
one another with lightning rapidity are no longer felt as complexities
but as unities. in this sense we hear of moral feelings of religious
feelings as if they were absolute unities. in reality they are streams
with a hundred sources and tributaries. here again the unity of the
word speaks nothing for the unity of the thing.

 miterklingen to sound simultaneously with.




=no within and without in the world.=--as democritus transferred the
notions above and below to limitless space where they are destitute of
meaning so the philosophers do generally with the idea within and
without as regards the form and substance wesen und erscheinung of
the world. what they claim is that through the medium of profound
feelings one can penetrate deep into the soul of things innre draw
close to the heart of nature. but these feelings are deep only in so far
as with them are simultaneously aroused although almost imperceptibly
certain complicated groups of thoughts gedankengruppen which we call
deep a feeling is deep because we deem the thoughts accompanying it
deep. but deep thought can nevertheless be very widely sundered from
truth as for instance every metaphysical thought. take from deep
feeling the element of thought blended with it and all that remains is
_strength_ of feeling which is no voucher for the validity of
knowledge as intense faith is evidence only of its own intensity and
not of the truth of that in which the faith is felt.

 kein innen und aussen in der welt the above translation may seem
too literal but some dispute has arisen concerning the precise idea the
author means to convey.




=phenomenon and thing-in-itself.=--the philosophers are in the habit of
placing themselves in front of life and experience--that which they call
the world of phenomena--as if they were standing before a picture that
is unrolled before them in its final completeness. this panorama they
think must be studied in every detail in order to reach some conclusion
regarding the object represented by the picture. from effect
accordingly is deduced cause and from cause is deduced the
unconditioned. this process is generally looked upon as affording the
all sufficient explanation of the world of phenomena. on the other hand
one must while putting the conception of the metaphysical distinctly
forward as that of the unconditioned and consequently of the
unconditioning absolutely deny any connection between the unconditioned
of the metaphysical world and the world known to us so that
throughout phenomena there is no manifestation of the thing-in-itself
and getting from one to the other is out of the question. thus is left
quite ignored the circumstance that the picture--that which we now call
life and experience--is a gradual evolution is indeed still in
process of evolution and for that reason should not be regarded as an
enduring whole from which any conclusion as to its author the
all-sufficient reason could be arrived at or even pronounced out of
the question. it is because we have for thousands of years looked into
the world with moral aesthetic religious predispositions with blind
prejudice passion or fear and surfeited ourselves with indulgence in
the follies of illogical thought that the world has gradually become so
wondrously motley frightful significant soulful it has taken on
tints but we have been the colorists the human intellect upon the
foundation of human needs of human passions has reared all these
phenomena and injected its own erroneous fundamental conceptions into
things. late very late the human intellect checks itself and now the
world of experience and the thing-in-itself seem to it so severed and so
antithetical that it denies the possibility of ones hinging upon the
other--or else summons us to surrender our intellect our personal will
to the secret and the awe-inspiring in order that thereby we may attain
certainty of certainty hereafter. again there are those who have
combined all the characteristic features of our world of
phenomena--that is the conception of the world which has been formed
and inherited through a series of intellectual vagaries--and instead of
holding the intellect responsible for it all have pronounced the very
nature of things accountable for the present very sinister aspect of the
world and preached annihilation of existence. through all these views
and opinions the toilsome steady process of science which now for the
first time begins to celebrate its greatest triumph in the genesis of
thought will definitely work itself out the result being perhaps to
the following effect that which we now call the world is the result of
a crowd of errors and fancies which gradually developed in the general
evolution of organic nature have grown together and been transmitted to
us as the accumulated treasure of all the past--as the _treasure_ for
whatever is worth anything in our humanity rests upon it. from this
world of conception it is in the power of science to release us only to
a slight extent--and this is all that could be wished--inasmuch as it
cannot eradicate the influence of hereditary habits of feeling but it
can light up by degrees the stages of the development of that world of
conception and lift us at least for a time above the whole spectacle.
perhaps we may then perceive that the thing-in-itself is a meet subject
for homeric laughter that it seemed so much everything indeed and
is really a void--void that is to say of meaning.




=metaphysical explanation.=--man when he is young prizes metaphysical
explanations because they make him see matters of the highest import in
things he found disagreeable or contemptible and if he is not satisfied
with himself this feeling of dissatisfaction is soothed when he sees
the most hidden world-problem or world-pain in that which he finds so
displeasing in himself. to feel himself more unresponsible and at the
same time to find things dinge more interesting--that is to him the
double benefit he owes to metaphysics. later indeed he acquires
distrust of the whole metaphysical method of explaining things he then
perceives perhaps that those effects could have been attained just as
well and more scientifically by another method that physical and
historical explanations would at least have given that feeling of
freedom from personal responsibility just as well while interest in
life and its problems would be stimulated perhaps even more.




=the fundamental problems of metaphysics.=--if a history of the
development of thought is ever written the following proposition
advanced by a distinguished logician will be illuminated with a new
light the universal primordial law of the apprehending subject
consists in the inner necessity of cognizing every object by itself as
in its essence a thing unto itself therefore as self-existing and
unchanging in short as a substance. even this law which is here
called primordial is an evolution it has yet to be shown how
gradually this evolution takes place in lower organizations how the
dim mole eyes of such organizations see at first nothing but a blank
sameness how later when the various excitations of desire and aversion
manifest themselves various substances are gradually distinguished but
each with an attribute that is a special relationship to such an
organization. the first step towards the logical is judgment the
essence of which according to the best logicians is belief. at the
foundation of all beliefs lie sensations of pleasure or pain in relation
to the apprehending subject. a third feeling as the result of two
prior single separate feelings is judgment in its crudest form. we
organic beings are primordially interested by nothing whatever in any
thing ding except its relation to ourselves with reference to pleasure
and pain. between the moments in which we are conscious of this
relation the states of feeling lie the moments of rest of
not-feeling then the world and every thing ding have no interest for
us we observe no change in them as at present a person absorbed in
something does not notice anyone passing by. to plants all things are
as a rule at rest eternal every object like itself. from the period
of lower organisms has been handed down to man the belief that there are
like things gleiche dinge only the trained experience attained
through the most advanced science contradicts this postulate. the
primordial belief of all organisms is perhaps that all the rest of the
world is one thing and motionless.--furthest away from this first step
towards the logical is the notion of causation even to-day we think
that all our feelings and doings are at bottom acts of the free will;
when the sentient individual contemplates himself he deems every
feeling every change a something isolated disconnected that is to
say unqualified by any thing; it comes suddenly to the surface
independent of anything that went before or came after. we are hungry
but originally we do not know that the organism must be nourished on
the contrary that feeling seems to manifest itself without reason or
purpose; it stands out by itself and seems quite independent. therefore
the belief in the freedom of the will is a primordial error of
everything organic as old as the very earliest inward prompting of the
logical faculty; belief in unconditioned substances and in like things
gleiche dinge is also a primordial and equally ancient error of
everything organic. inasmuch as all metaphysic has concerned itself
particularly with substance and with freedom of the will it should be
designated as the science that deals with the fundamental errors of
mankind as if they were fundamental truths.




=number.=--the invention of the laws of number has as its basis the
primordial and prior-prevailing delusion that many like things exist
although in point of fact there is no such thing is a duplicate or
that at least there are things but there is no thing. the
assumption of plurality always presupposes that _something_ exists which
manifests itself repeatedly but just here is where the delusion
prevails; in this very matter we feign realities unities that have no
existence. our feelings notions of space and time are false for they
lead when duly tested to logical contradictions. in all scientific
demonstrations we always unavoidably base our calculation upon some
false standards of duration or measurement but as these standards are
at least _constant_ as for example our notions of time and space the
results arrived at by science possess absolute accuracy and certainty in
their relationship to one another one can keep on building upon
them--until is reached that final limit at which the erroneous
fundamental conceptions the invariable breakdown come into conflict
with the results established--as for example in the case of the atomic
theory. here we always find ourselves obliged to give credence to a
thing or material substratum that is set in motion although at the
same time the whole scientific programme has had as its aim the
resolving of everything material into motions themselves here again
we distinguish with our feeling that which does the moving and that
which is moved and we never get out of this circle because the
belief in things has been from time immemorial rooted in our
nature.--when kant says the intellect does not derive its laws from
nature but dictates them to her he states the full truth as regards
the _idea of nature_ which we form nature = world as notion that is
as error but which is merely the synthesis of a host of errors of the
intellect. to a world not the outcome of our conception the laws of
number are wholly inapplicable such laws are valid only in the world of
mankind.

 wir scheiden auch hier noch mit unserer empfindung bewegendes und
bewegtes.

 glaube an dinge.




=some backward steps.=--one very forward step in education is taken when
man emerges from his superstitious and religious ideas and fears and
for instance no longer believes in the dear little angels or in
original sin and has stopped talking about the salvation of the soul
when he has taken this step to freedom he has nevertheless through the
utmost exertion of his mental power to overcome metaphysics. then a
backward movement is necessary he must appreciate the historical
justification and to an equal extent the psychological considerations
in such a movement. he must understand that the greatest advances made
by mankind have resulted from such a course and that without this very
backward movement the highest achievements of man hitherto would have
been impossible.--with regard to philosophical metaphysics i see ever
more and more who have arrived at the negative goal that all positive
metaphysic is a delusion but as yet very few who go a few steps
backward one should look out over the last rungs of the ladder but not
try to stand on them that is to say. the most advanced as yet go only
far enough to free themselves from metaphysic and look back at it with
an air of superiority whereas here no less than in the hippodrome it
is necessary to turn around in order to reach the end of the course.




=presumable nature of the victory of doubt.=--let us assume for a
moment the validity of the skeptical standpoint granted that there is
no metaphysical world and that all the metaphysical explanations of the
only world we know are useless to us how would we then contemplate men
and things menschen und dinge. this can be thought out and it is
worth while doing so even if the question whether anything metaphysical
has ever been demonstrated by or through kant and schopenhauer be put
altogether aside. for it is to all appearances highly probable that
men on this point will be in the mass skeptical. the question thus
becomes what sort of a notion will human society under the influence
of such a state of mind form of itself perhaps the _scientific
demonstration_ of any metaphysical world is now so difficult that
mankind will never be free from a distrust of it. and when there is
formed a feeling of distrust of metaphysics the results are in the
mass the same as if metaphysics were refuted altogether and _could_ no
longer be believed. in both cases the historical question with regard
to an unmetaphysical disposition in mankind remains the same.




=disbelief in the monumentum aere perennius.=--a decided
disadvantage attending the termination of metaphysical modes of
thought is that the individual fixes his mind too attentively upon his
own brief lifetime and feels no strong inducement to aid in the
foundation of institutions capable of enduring for centuries he wishes
himself to gather the fruit from the tree that he plants and
consequently he no longer plants those trees which require centuries of
constant cultivation and are destined to afford shade to generation
after generation in the future. for metaphysical views inspire the
belief that in them is afforded the final sure foundation upon which
henceforth the whole future of mankind may rest and be built up the
individual promotes his own salvation; when for example he builds a
church or a monastery he is of opinion that he is doing something for
the salvation of his immortal soul--can science as well inspire such
faith in the efficacy of her results in actual fact science requires
doubt and distrust as her surest auxiliaries; nevertheless the sum of
the irresistible that is all the onslaughts of skepticism all the
disintegrating effects of surviving truths can easily become so great
as for instance in the case of hygienic science as to inspire the
determination to build eternal works upon it. at present the contrast
between our excitated ephemeral existence and the tranquil repose of
metaphysical epochs is too great because both are as yet in too close
juxtaposition. the individual man himself now goes through too many
stages of inner and outer evolution for him to venture to make a plan
even for his life time alone. a perfectly modern man indeed who wants
to build himself a house feels as if he were walling himself up alive in
a mausoleum.

 monument more enduring than brass horace odes iiixxx.




=age of comparison.=--the less men are bound by tradition the greater
is the inner activity of motives the greater correspondingly the
outer restlessness the promiscuous flow of humanity the polyphony of
strivings. who now feels any great impulse to establish himself and his
posterity in a particular place for whom moreover does there exist
at present any strong tie as all the methods of the arts were copied
from one another so were all the methods and advancements of moral
codes of manners of civilizations.--such an age derives its
significance from the fact that in it the various ideas codes manners
and civilizations can be compared and experienced side by side; which
was impossible at an earlier period in view of the localised nature of
the rule of every civilization corresponding to the limitation of all
artistic effects by time and place. to-day the growth of the aesthetic
feeling is decided owing to the great number of artistic forms which
offer themselves for comparison. the majority--those that are condemned
by the method of comparison--will be allowed to die out. in the same way
there is to-day taking place a selection of the forms and customs of the
higher morality which can result only in the extinction of the vulgar
moralities. this is the age of comparison! that is its glory--but also
its pain. let us not however shrink from this pain. rather would we
comprehend the nature of the task imposed upon us by our age as
adequately as we can posterity will bless us for doing so--a posterity
that knows itself to be developed through and above the narrow early
race-civilizations as well as the culture-civilization of comparison
but yet looks gratefully back upon both as venerable monuments of
antiquity.




=possibility of progress.=--when a master of the old civilization den
alten cultur vows to hold no more discussion with men who believe in
progress he is quite right. for the old civilization has its
greatness and its advantages behind it and historic training forces one
to acknowledge that it can never again acquire vigor only intolerable
stupidity or equally intolerable fanaticism could fail to perceive this
fact. but men may consciously determine to evolve to a new civilization
where formerly they evolved unconsciously and accidentally. they can now
devise better conditions for the advancement of mankind for their
nourishment training and education they can administer the earth as an
economic power and particularly compare the capacities of men and
select them accordingly. this new conscious civilization is killing the
other which on the whole has led but an unreflective animal and plant
life it is also destroying the doubt of progress itself--progress is
possible. i mean it is hasty and almost unreflective to assume that
progress must _necessarily_ take place but how can it be doubted that
progress is possible on the other hand progress in the sense and along
the lines of the old civilization is not even conceivable. if romantic
fantasy employs the word progress in connection with certain aims and
ends identical with those of the circumscribed primitive national
civilizations the picture presented of progress is always borrowed from
the past. the idea and the image of progress thus formed are quite
without originality.

 cultur culture civilisation etc. but there is no exact english
equivalent.




=private ethics and world ethics.=--since the extinction of the belief
that a god guides the general destiny of the world and notwithstanding
all the contortions and windings of the path of mankind leads it
gloriously forward men must shape oecumenical world-embracing ends for
themselves. the older ethics namely kants required of the individual
such a course of conduct as he wishes all men to follow. this evinces
much simplicity--as if any individual could determine off hand what
course of conduct would conduce to the welfare of humanity and what
course of conduct is preminently desirable! this is a theory like that
of freedom of competition which takes it for granted that the general
harmony of things _must_ prevail of itself in accordance with some
inherent law of betterment or amelioration. it may be that a later
contemplation of the needs of mankind will reveal that it is by no means
desirable that all men should regulate their conduct according to the
same principle; it may be best from the standpoint of certain ends yet
to be attained that men during long periods should regulate their
conduct with reference to special and even in certain circumstances
evil objects. at any rate if mankind is not to be led astray by such a
universal rule of conduct it behooves it to attain a _knowledge of the
condition of culture_ that will serve as a scientific standard of
comparison in connection with cosmical ends. herein is comprised the
tremendous mission of the great spirits of the next century.




=reaction as progress.=--occasionally harsh powerful impetuous yet
nevertheless backward spirits appear who try to conjure back some past
era in the history of mankind they serve as evidence that the new
tendencies which they oppose are not yet potent enough that there is
something lacking in them otherwise they the tendencies would better
withstand the effects of this conjuring back process. thus luthers
reformation shows that in his century all the impulses to freedom of the
spirit were still uncertain lacking in vigor and immature. science
could not yet rear her head. indeed the whole renaissance appears but as
an early spring smothered in snow. but even in the present century
schopenhauers metaphysic shows that the scientific spirit is not yet
powerful enough for the whole mediaeval christian world-standpoint
weltbetrachtung and conception of man mensch-empfindung once
again notwithstanding the slowly wrought destruction of all christian
dogma celebrated a resurrection in schopenhauers doctrine. there is
much science in his teaching although the science does not dominate
but instead of it the old trite metaphysical necessity. it is one
of the greatest and most priceless advantages of schopenhauers teaching
that by it our feelings are temporarily forced back to those old human
and cosmical standpoints to which no other path could conduct us so
easily. the gain for history and justice is very great. i believe that
without schopenhauers aid it would be no easy matter for anyone now to
do justice to christianity and its asiatic relatives--a thing impossible
as regards the christianity that still survives. after according this
great triumph to justice after we have corrected in so essential a
respect the historical point of view which the age of learning brought
with it we may begin to bear still farther onward the banner of
enlightenment--a banner bearing the three names petrarch erasmus
voltaire. we have taken a forward step out of reaction.

 literally man-feeling or human outlook.




=a substitute for religion.=--it is supposed to be a recommendation for
philosophy to say of it that it provides the people with a substitute
for religion. and in fact the training of the intellect does
necessitate the convenient laying out of the track of thought since the
transition from religion by way of science entails a powerful perilous
leap--something that should be advised against. with this
qualification the recommendation referred to is a just one. at the same
time it should be further explained that the needs which religion
satisfies and which science must now satisfy are not immutable. even
they can be diminished and uprooted. think for instance of the
christian soul-need the sighs over ones inner corruption the anxiety
regarding salvation--all notions that arise simply out of errors of the
reason and require no satisfaction at all but annihilation. a
philosophy can either so affect these needs as to appease them or else
put them aside altogether for they are acquired circumscribed needs
based upon hypotheses which those of science explode. here for the
purpose of affording the means of transition for the sake of lightening
the spirit overburdened with feeling art can be employed to far better
purpose as these hypotheses receive far less support from art than from
a metaphysical philosophy. then from art it is easier to go over to a
really emancipating philosophical science.




=discredited words.=--away with the disgustingly over-used words
optimism and pessimism! for the occasion for using them grows daily
less; only drivelers now find them indispensably necessary. what earthly
reason could anyone have for being an optimist unless he had a god to
defend who _must_ have created the best of all possible worlds since he
is himself all goodness and perfection--but what thinking man has now
any need for the hypothesis that there is a god--there is also no
occasion whatever for a pessimistic confession of faith unless one has
a personal interest in denouncing the advocate of god the theologian or
the theological philosopher and maintaining the counter proposition
that evil reigns that wretchedness is more potent than joy that the
world is a piece of botch work that phenomenon erscheinung is but the
manifestation of some evil spirit. but who bothers his head about the
theologians any more--except the theologians themselves apart from all
theology and its antagonism it is manifest that the world is neither
good nor bad to say nothing about its being the best or the worst and
that these ideas of good and bad have significance only in relation
to men indeed are without significance at all in view of the sense in
which they are usually employed. the contemptuous and the eulogistic
point of view must in every case be repudiated.




=intoxicated by the perfume of flowers.=--the ship of humanity it is
thought acquires an ever deeper draught the more it is laden. it is
believed that the more profoundly man thinks the more exquisitely he
feels the higher the standard he sets for himself the greater his
distance from the other animals--the more he appears as a genius
genie among animals--the nearer he gets to the true nature of the
world and to comprehension thereof this indeed he really does through
science but he thinks he does it far more adequately through his
religions and arts. these are certainly a blossoming of the world but
not therefore _nearer the roots of the world_ than is the stalk. one
cannot learn best from it the nature of the world although nearly
everyone thinks so. _error_ has made men so deep sensitive and
imaginative in order to bring forth such flowers as religions and arts.
pure apprehension would be unable to do that. whoever should disclose to
us the essence of the world would be undeceiving us most cruelly. not
the world as thing-in-itself but the world as idea as error is
rich in portent deep wonderful carrying happiness and unhappiness in
its womb. this result leads to a philosophy of world negation which at
any rate can be as well combined with a practical world affirmation as
with its opposite.

 vorstellung this word sometimes corresponds to the english word
idea at others to conception or notion.




=evil habits in reaching conclusions.=--the most usual erroneous
conclusions of men are these a thing exists therefore it is right
here from capacity to live is deduced fitness from fitness is deduced
justification. so also an opinion gives happiness therefore it is the
true one its effect is good therefore it is itself good and true. here
is predicated of the effect that it gives happiness that it is good in
the sense of utility and there is likewise predicated of the cause that
it is good but good in the sense of logical validity. conversely the
proposition would run a thing cannot attain success cannot
maintain itself therefore it is evil a belief troubles the believer
occasions pain therefore it is false. the free spirit who is sensible
of the defect in this method of reaching conclusions and has had to
suffer its consequences often succumbs to the temptation to come to the
very opposite conclusions which in general are of course equally
erroneous a thing cannot maintain itself therefore it is good; a
belief is troublesome therefore it is true.

 sache thing but not in the sense of ding. sache is of very
indefinite application res.




=the illogical is necessary.=--among the things which can bring a
thinker to distraction is the knowledge that the illogical is necessary
to mankind and that from the illogical springs much that is good. the
illogical is so imbedded in the passions in language in art in
religion and above all in everything that imparts value to life that
it cannot be taken away without irreparably injuring those beautiful
things. only men of the utmost simplicity can believe that the nature
man knows can be changed into a purely logical nature. yet were there
steps affording approach to this goal how utterly everything would be
lost on the way! even the most rational man needs nature again from
time to time that is his illogical fundamental relation
grundstellung to all things.




=being unjust is essential.=--all judgments of the value of life are
illogically developed and therefore unjust. the vice of the judgment
consists first in the way in which the subject matter comes under
observation that is very incompletely; secondly in the way in which
the total is summed up; and thirdly in the fact that each single item
in the totality of the subject matter is itself the result of defective
perception and this from absolute necessity. no practical knowledge of
a man for example stood he never so near to us can be complete--so
that we could have a logical right to form a total estimate of him; all
estimates are summary and must be so. then the standard by which we
measure our being is not an immutable quantity; we have moods and
variations and yet we should know ourselves as an invariable standard
before we undertake to establish the nature of the relation of any thing
sache to ourselves. perhaps it will follow from all this that one
should form no judgments whatever; if one could but merely _live_
without having to form estimates without aversion and without
partiality!--for everything most abhorred is closely connected with an
estimate as well as every strongest partiality. an inclination towards
a thing or from a thing without an accompanying feeling that the
beneficial is desired and the pernicious contemned an inclination
without a sort of experiential estimation of the desirability of an end
does not exist in man. we are primordially illogical and hence unjust
beings _and can recognise this fact_ this is one of the greatest and
most baffling discords of existence.




=error respecting living for the sake of living essential.=--every
belief in the value and worthiness of life rests upon defective
thinking; it is for this reason alone possible that sympathy with the
general life and suffering of mankind is so imperfectly developed in the
individual. even exceptional men who can think beyond their own
personalities do not have this general life in view but isolated
portions of it. if one is capable of fixing his observation upon
exceptional cases i mean upon highly endowed individuals and pure
souled beings if their development is taken as the true end of
world-evolution and if joy be felt in their existence then it is
possible to believe in the value of life because in that case the rest
of humanity is overlooked hence we have here defective thinking. so
too it is even if all mankind be taken into consideration and one
species only of impulses the less egoistic brought under review and
those in consideration of the other impulses exalted then something
could still be hoped of mankind in the mass and to that extent there
could exist belief in the value of life here again as a result of
defective thinking. whatever attitude thus one may assume one is as
a result of this attitude an exception among mankind. now the great
majority of mankind endure life without any great protest and believe
to this extent in the value of existence but that is because each
individual decides and determines alone and never comes out of his own
personality like these exceptions everything outside of the personal
has no existence for them or at the utmost is observed as but a faint
shadow. consequently the value of life for the generality of mankind
consists simply in the fact that the individual attaches more importance
to himself than he does to the world. the great lack of imagination from
which he suffers is responsible for his inability to enter into the
feelings of beings other than himself and hence his sympathy with their
fate and suffering is of the slightest possible description. on the
other hand whosoever really _could_ sympathise necessarily doubts the
value of life; were it possible for him to sum up and to feel in himself
the total consciousness of mankind he would collapse with a malediction
against existence--for mankind is in the mass without a goal and
hence man cannot find in the contemplation of his whole course
anything to serve him as a mainstay and a comfort but rather a reason
to despair. if he looks beyond the things that immediately engage him to
the final aimlessness of humanity his own conduct assumes in his eyes
the character of a frittering away. to feel oneself however as
humanity not alone as an individual frittered away exactly as we see
the stray leaves frittered away by nature is a feeling transcending all
feeling. but who is capable of it only a poet certainly and poets
always know how to console themselves.




=for tranquility.=--but will not our philosophy become thus a tragedy
will not truth prove the enemy of life of betterment a question seems
to weigh upon our tongue and yet will not put itself into words whether
one _can_ knowingly remain in the domain of the untruthful or if one
_must_ whether then death would not be preferable for there is no
longer any ought sollen morality; so far as it is involved ought
is through our point of view as utterly annihilated as religion. our
knowledge can permit only pleasure and pain benefit and injury to
subsist as motives. but how can these motives be distinguished from the
desire for truth even they rest upon error in so far as already
stated partiality and dislike and their very inaccurate estimates
palpably modify our pleasure and our pain. the whole of human life is
deeply involved in _untruth_. the individual cannot extricate it from
this pit without thereby fundamentally clashing with his whole past
without finding his present motives of conduct as that of honor
illegitimate and without opposing scorn and contempt to the ambitions
which prompt one to have regard for the future and for ones happiness
in the future. is it true does there then remain but one way of
thinking which as a personal consequence brings in its train despair
and as a theoretical consequence brings in its train a philosophy of
decay disintegration self annihilation i believe the deciding
influence as regards the after-effect of knowledge will be the
_temperament_ of a man; i can in addition to this after-effect just
mentioned suppose another by means of which a much simpler life and
one freer from disturbances than the present could be lived; so that at
first the old motives of vehement passion might still have strength
owing to hereditary habit but they would gradually grow weaker under
the influence of purifying knowledge. a man would live at last both
among men and unto himself as in the natural state without praise
reproach competition feasting ones eyes as if it were a play upon
much that formerly inspired dread. one would be rid of the strenuous
element and would no longer feel the goad of the reflection that man is
not even as much as nature nor more than nature. to be sure this
requires as already stated a good temperament a fortified gentle and
naturally cheerful soul a disposition that has no need to be on its
guard against its own eccentricities and sudden outbreaks and that in
its utterances manifests neither sullenness nor a snarling tone--those
familiar disagreeable characteristics of old dogs and old men that have
been a long time chained up. rather must a man from whom the ordinary
bondages of life have fallen away to so great an extent so do that he
only lives on in order to grow continually in knowledge and to learn to
resign without envy and without disappointment much yes nearly
everything that has value in the eyes of men. he must be content with
such a free fearless soaring above men manners laws and traditional
estimates of things as the most desirable of all situations. he will
freely share the joy of being in such a situation and he has perhaps
nothing else to share--in which renunciation and self-denial really most
consist. but if more is asked of him he will with a benevolent shake
of the head refer to his brother the free man of fact and will
perhaps not dissemble a little contempt for as regards his freedom
thereby hangs a tale.

 den mit dessen freiheit hat es eine eigene bewandtniss.




history of the moral feelings.




=advantages of psychological observation.=--that reflection regarding
the human all-too-human--or as the learned jargon is psychological
observation--is among the means whereby the burden of life can be made
lighter that practice in this art affords presence of mind in difficult
situations and entertainment amid a wearisome environment aye that
maxims may be culled in the thorniest and least pleasing paths of life
and invigoration thereby obtained this much was believed was known--in
former centuries. why was this forgotten in our own century during
which at least in germany yes in europe poverty as regards
psychological observation would have been manifest in many ways had
there been anyone to whom this poverty could have manifested itself. not
only in the novel in the romance in philosophical standpoints--these
are the works of exceptional men; still more in the state of opinion
regarding public events and personages; above all in general society
which says much about men but nothing whatever about man there is
totally lacking the art of psychological analysis and synthesis. but why
is the richest and most harmless source of entertainment thus allowed to
run to waste why is the greatest master of the psychological maxim no
longer read--for with no exaggeration whatever be it said the
educated person in europe who has read la rochefoucauld and his
intellectual and artistic affinities is very hard to find; still harder
the person who knows them and does not disparage them. apparently too
this unusual reader takes far less pleasure in them than the form
adopted by these artists should afford him for the subtlest mind cannot
adequately appreciate the art of maxim-making unless it has had training
in it unless it has competed in it. without such practical
acquaintance one is apt to look upon this making and forming as a much
easier thing than it really is; one is not keenly enough alive to the
felicity and the charm of success. hence present day readers of maxims
have but a moderate tempered pleasure in them scarcely indeed a true
perception of their merit so that their experiences are about the same
as those of the average beholder of cameos people who praise because
they cannot appreciate and are very ready to admire and still readier
to turn away.




=objection.=--or is there a counter-proposition to the dictum that
psychological observation is one of the means of consoling lightening
charming existence have enough of the unpleasant effects of this art
been experienced to justify the person striving for culture in turning
his regard away from it in all truth a certain blind faith in the
goodness of human nature an implanted distaste for any disparagement of
human concerns a sort of shamefacedness at the nakedness of the soul
may be far more desirable things in the general happiness of a man than
this only occasionally advantageous quality of psychological
sharpsightedness; and perhaps belief in the good in virtuous men and
actions in a plenitude of disinterested benevolence has been more
productive of good in the world of men in so far as it has made men less
distrustful. if plutarchs heroes are enthusiastically imitated and a
reluctance is experienced to looking too critically into the motives of
their actions not the knowledge but the welfare of human society is
promoted thereby psychological error and above all obtuseness in regard
to it help human nature forward whereas knowledge of the truth is more
promoted by means of the stimulating strength of a hypothesis; as la
rochefoucauld in the first edition of his sentences and moral maxims
has expressed it what the world calls virtue is ordinarily but a
phantom created by the passions and to which we give a good name in
order to do whatever we please with impunity. la rochefoucauld and
those other french masters of soul-searching to the number of whom has
lately been added a german the author of psychological observations
are like expert marksmen who again and again hit the black spot--but it
is the black spot in human nature. their art inspires amazement but
finally some spectator inspired not by the scientific spirit but by a
humanitarian feeling execrates an art that seems to implant in the soul
a taste for belittling and impeaching mankind.




=nevertheless.=--the matter therefore as regards pro and con stands
thus in the present state of philosophy an awakening of the moral
observation is essential. the repulsive aspect of psychological
dissection with the knife and tweezers entailed by the process can no
longer be spared humanity. such is the imperative duty of any science
that investigates the origin and history of the so-called moral feelings
and which in its progress is called upon to posit and to solve
advanced social problems--the older philosophy does not recognize the
newer at all and through paltry evasions has always gone astray in the
investigation of the origin and history of human estimates
werthschtzungen. with what results may now be very clearly perceived
since it has been shown by many examples how the errors of the greatest
philosophers have their origin in a false explanation of certain human
actions and feelings; how upon the foundation of an erroneous analysis
for example of the so called disinterested actions a false ethic is
reared to support which religion and like mythological monstrosities
are called in until finally the shades of these troubled spirits
collapse in physics and in the comprehensive world point of view. but if
it be established that superficiality of psychological observation has
heretofore set the most dangerous snares for human judgment and
deduction and will continue to do so all the greater need is there of
that steady continuance of labor that never wearies putting stone upon
stone little stone upon little stone; all the greater need is there of
a courage that is not ashamed of such humble labor and that will oppose
persistence to all contempt. it is finally also true that countless
single observations concerning the human all-too-human have been
first made and uttered in circles accustomed not to furnish matter for
scientific knowledge but for intellectual pleasure-seeking; and the
original home atmosphere--a very seductive atmosphere--of the moral
maxim has almost inextricably interpenetrated the entire species so
that the scientific man involuntarily manifests a sort of mistrust of
this species and of its seriousness. but it is sufficient to point to
the consequences for already it is becoming evident that events of the
most portentous nature are developing in the domain of psychological
observation. what is the leading conclusion arrived at by one of the
subtlest and calmest of thinkers the author of the work concerning the
origin of the moral feelings as a result of his thorough and incisive
analysis of human conduct the moral man he says stands no nearer
the knowable metaphysical world than the physical man. this
dictum grown hard and cutting beneath the hammer-blow of historical
knowledge can some day perhaps in some future or other serve as the
axe that will be laid to the root of the metaphysical necessities of
men--whether more to the blessing than to the banning of universal well
being who can say--but in any event a dictum fraught with the most
momentous consequences fruitful and fearful at once and confronting
the world in the two faced way characteristic of all great facts.

 der moralische mensch sagt er steht der intelligiblen
metaphysischen welt nicht nher als der physische mensch.




=to what extent useful.=--therefore whether psychological observation
is more an advantage than a disadvantage to mankind may always remain
undetermined but there is no doubt that it is necessary because
science can no longer dispense with it. science however recognizes no
considerations of ultimate goals or ends any more than nature does; but
as the latter duly matures things of the highest fitness for certain
ends without any intention of doing it so will true science doing with
ideas what nature does with matter promote the purposes and the
welfare of humanity as occasion may afford and in many ways and
attain fitness to ends--but likewise without having intended it.

 als die nachahmung der natur in begriffen literally as the
counterfeit of nature in regard to ideas.

he to whom the atmospheric conditions of such a prospect are too wintry
has too little fire in him let him look about him and he will become
sensible of maladies requiring an icy air and of people who are so
kneaded together out of ardor and intellect that they can scarcely
find anywhere an atmosphere too cold and cutting for them. moreover as
too serious individuals and nations stand in need of trivial
relaxations; as others too volatile and excitable require onerous
weighty ordeals to render them entirely healthy should not we the more
intellectual men of this age which is swept more and more by
conflagrations catch up every cooling and extinguishing appliance we
can find that we may always remain as self contained steady and calm as
we are now and thereby perhaps serve this age as its mirror and self
reflector when the occasion arises




=the fable of discretionary freedom.=--the history of the feelings on
the basis of which we make everyone responsible hence the so-called
moral feelings is traceable in the following leading phases. at first
single actions are termed good or bad without any reference to their
motive but solely because of the utilitarian or prejudicial
consequences they have for the community. in time however the origin
of these designations is forgotten but it is imagined that action in
itself without reference to its consequences contains the property
good or bad with the same error according to which language
designates the stone itself as hardness the tree itself as
greenness--for the reason therefore that what is a consequence is
comprehended as a cause. accordingly the goodness or badness is
incorporated into the motive and any deed by itself is regarded as
morally ambiguous. a step further is taken and the predication good or
bad is no longer made of the particular motives but of the entire nature
of a man out of which motive grows as grow the plants out of the soil.
thus man is successively made responsible for his particular acts
then for his course of conduct then for his motives and finally for
his nature. now at last is it discovered that this nature even
cannot be responsible inasmuch as it is only and wholly a necessary
consequence and is synthesised out of the elements and influence of past
and present things therefore that man is to be made responsible for
nothing neither for his nature nor his motives nor his course of
conduct nor his particular acts. by this process is gained the
knowledge that the history of moral estimates is the history of error
of the error of responsibility as is whatever rests upon the error of
the freedom of the will. schopenhauer concluded just the other way
thus since certain actions bring depression consciousness of guilt
in their train there must then exist responsibility for there would
be no basis for this depression at hand if all mans affairs did not
follow their course of necessity--as they do indeed according to the
opinion of this philosopher follow their course--but man himself
subject to the same necessity would be just the man that he is--which
schopenhauer denies. from the fact of such depression schopenhauer
believes himself able to prove a freedom which man in some way must have
had not indeed in regard to his actions but in regard to his nature
freedom therefore to be thus and so not to act thus and so. out of
the _esse_ the sphere of freedom and responsibility follows according
to his opinion the _operari_ the spheres of invariable causation
necessity and irresponsibility. this depression indeed is due
apparently to the _operari_--in so far as it be delusive--but in truth
to whatever _esse_ be the deed of a free will the basic cause of the
existence of an individual in order to let man become whatever he
wills to become his to will wollen must precede his
existence.--here apart from the absurdity of the statement just made
there is drawn the wrong inference that the fact of the depression
explains its character the rational admissibility of it from such a
wrong inference does schopenhauer first come to his fantastic consequent
of the so called discretionary freedom intelligibeln freiheit. for
the origin of this fabulous entity plato and kant are equally
responsible. but depression after the act does not need to be rational
indeed it is certainly not so at all for it rests upon the erroneous
assumption that the act need not necessarily have come to pass.
therefore only because man deems himself free but not because
he is free does he experience remorse and the stings of
conscience.--moreover this depression is something that can be grown
out of; in many men it is not present at all as a consequence of acts
which inspire it in many other men. it is a very varying thing and one
closely connected with the development of custom and civilization and
perhaps manifest only during a relatively brief period of the worlds
history.--no one is responsible for his acts no one for his nature; to
judge is tantamount to being unjust. this applies as well when the
individual judges himself. the proposition is as clear as sunlight and
yet here everyone prefers to go back to darkness and untruth for fear
of the consequences.




=above animal.=--the beast in us must be wheedled ethic is necessary
that we may not be torn to pieces. without the errors involved in the
assumptions of ethics man would have remained an animal. thus has he
taken himself as something higher and imposed rigid laws upon himself.
he feels hatred consequently for states approximating the animal
whence the former contempt for the slave as a not-yet-man as a thing
is to be explained.




=unalterable character.=--that character is unalterable is not in the
strict sense true; rather is this favorite proposition valid only to
the extent that during the brief life period of a man the potent new
motives can not usually press down hard enough to obliterate the lines
imprinted by ages. could we conceive of a man eighty thousand years old
we should have in him an absolutely alterable character; so that the
maturities of successive varying individuals would develop in him. the
shortness of human life leads to many erroneous assertions concerning
the qualities of man.




=classification of enjoyments and ethic.=--the once accepted comparative
classification of enjoyments according to which an inferior higher
highest egoism may crave one or another enjoyment now decides as to
ethical status or unethical status. a lower enjoyment for example
sensual pleasure preferred to a more highly esteemed one for example
health rates as unethical as does welfare preferred to freedom. the
comparative classification of enjoyments is not however alike or the
same at all periods; when anyone demands satisfaction of the law he is
from the point of view of an earlier civilization moral from that of
the present non-moral. unethical indicates therefore that a man is
not sufficiently sensible to the higher finer impulses which the
present civilization has brought with it or is not sensible to them at
all; it indicates backwardness but only from the point of view of the
contemporary degree of distinction.--the comparative classification of
enjoyments itself is not determined according to absolute ethics; but
after each new ethical adjustment it is then decided whether conduct be
ethical or the reverse.




=inhuman men as survivals.=--men who are now inhuman must serve us as
surviving specimens of earlier civilizations. the mountain height of
humanity here reveals its lower formations which might otherwise remain
hidden from view. there are surviving specimens of humanity whose brains
through the vicissitudes of heredity have escaped proper development.
they show us what we all were and thus appal us; but they are as little
responsible on this account as is a piece of granite for being granite.
in our own brains there must be courses and windings corresponding to
such characters just as in the forms of some human organs there survive
traces of fishhood. but these courses and windings are no longer the bed
in which flows the stream of our feeling.




=gratitude and revenge.=--the reason the powerful man is grateful is
this. his benefactor has through his benefaction invaded the domain of
the powerful man and established himself on an equal footing the
powerful man in turn invades the domain of the benefactor and gets
satisfaction through the act of gratitude. it is a mild form of revenge.
by not obtaining the satisfaction of gratitude the powerful would have
shown himself powerless and have ranked as such thenceforward. hence
every society of the good that is to say of the powerful originally
places gratitude among the first of duties.--swift has added the dictum
that man is grateful in the same degree that he is revengeful.




=two-fold historical origin of good and evil.=--the notion of good and
bad has a two-fold historical origin namely first in the spirit of
ruling races and castes. whoever has power to requite good with good and
evil with evil and actually brings requital that is is grateful and
revengeful acquires the name of being good; whoever is powerless and
cannot requite is called bad. a man belongs as a good individual to
the good of a community who have a feeling in common because all the
individuals are allied with one another through the requiting sentiment.
a man belongs as a bad individual to the bad to a mass of
subjugated powerless men who have no feeling in common. the good are a
caste the bad are a quantity like dust. good and bad is for a
considerable period tantamount to noble and servile master and slave.
on the other hand an enemy is not looked upon as bad he can requite.
the trojan and the greek are in homer both good. not he who does no
harm but he who is despised is deemed bad. in the community of the
good individuals the quality of goodness is inherited; it is
impossible for a bad individual to grow from such a rich soil. if
notwithstanding one of the good individuals does something unworthy of
his goodness recourse is had to exorcism; thus the guilt is ascribed to
a deity the while it is declared that this deity bewitched the good man
into madness and blindness.--second in the spirit of the subjugated
the powerless. here every other man is to the individual hostile
inconsiderate greedy inhuman avaricious be he noble or servile; bad
is the characteristic term for man for every living being indeed that
is recognized at all even for a god human divine these notions are
tantamount to devilish bad. manifestations of goodness sympathy
helpfulness are regarded with anxiety as trickiness preludes to an
evil end deception subtlety in short as refined badness. with such a
predisposition in individuals a feeling in common can scarcely arise at
all at most only the rudest form of it so that everywhere that this
conception of good and evil prevails the destruction of the
individuals their race and nation is imminent.--our existing morality
has developed upon the foundation laid by ruling races and castes.




=sympathy greater than suffering.=--there are circumstances in which
sympathy is stronger than the suffering itself. we feel more pain for
instance when one of our friends becomes guilty of a reprehensible
action than if we had done the deed ourselves. we once that is had
more faith in the purity of his character than he had himself. hence our
love for him apparently because of this very faith is stronger than
is his own love for himself. if indeed his egoism really suffers more
as a result than our egoism inasmuch as he must take the consequences
of his fault to a greater extent than ourselves nevertheless the
unegoistic--this word is not to be taken too strictly but simply as a
modified form of expression--in us is more affected by his guilt than
the unegoistic in him.




=hypochondria.=--there are people who from sympathy and anxiety for
others become hypochondriacal. the resulting form of compassion is
nothing else than sickness. so also is there a christian hypochondria
from which those singular religiously agitated people suffer who place
always before their eyes the suffering and death of christ.




=economy of blessings.=--the advantageous and the pleasing as the
healthiest growths and powers in the intercourse of men are such
precious treasures that it is much to be wished the use made of these
balsamic means were as economical as possible but this is impossible.
economy in the use of blessings is the dream of the craziest of
utopians.




=well-wishing.=--among the small but infinitely plentiful and therefore
very potent things to which science must pay more attention than to the
great uncommon things well-wishing must be reckoned; i mean those
manifestations of friendly disposition in intercourse that laughter of
the eye every hand pressure every courtesy from which in general
every human act gets its quality. every teacher every functionary adds
this element as a gratuity to whatever he does as a duty; it is the
perpetual well spring of humanity like the waves of light in which
everything grows; thus in the narrowest circles within the family
life blooms and flowers only through this kind feeling. the
cheerfulness friendliness and kindness of a heart are unfailing
sources of unegoistic impulse and have made far more for civilization
than those other more noised manifestations of it that are styled
sympathy benevolence and sacrifice. but it is customary to depreciate
these little tokens of kindly feeling and indeed there is not much of
the unegoistic in them. the sum of these little doses is very great
nevertheless; their combined strength is of the greatest of
strengths.--thus too much more happiness is to be found in the world
than gloomy eyes discover that is if the calculation be just and all
these pleasing moments in which every day even the meanest human life
is rich be not forgotten.

 wohl-wollen kind feeling. it stands here for benevolence but not
benevolence in the restricted sense of the word now prevailing.




=the desire to inspire compassion.=--la rochefoucauld in the most
notable part of his self portraiture first printed  reaches the
vital spot of truth when he warns all those endowed with reason to be on
their guard against compassion when he advises that this sentiment be
left to men of the masses who stand in need of the promptings of the
emotions since they are not guided by reason to induce them to give
aid to the suffering and to be of service in misfortune whereas
compassion in his and platos view deprives the heart of strength.
to be sure sympathy should be manifested but men should take care not
to feel it; for the unfortunate are rendered so dull that the
manifestation of sympathy affords them the greatest happiness in the
world.--perhaps a more effectual warning against this compassion can be
given if this need of the unfortunate be considered not simply as
stupidity and intellectual weakness not as a sort of distraction of the
spirit entailed by misfortune itself and thus indeed does la
rochefoucauld seem to view it but as something quite different and more
momentous. let note be taken of children who cry and scream in order to
be compassionated and who therefore await the moment when their
condition will be observed; come into contact with the sick and the
oppressed in spirit and try to ascertain if the wailing and sighing the
posturing and posing of misfortune do not have as end and aim the
causing of pain to the beholder the sympathy which each beholder
manifests is a consolation to the weak and suffering only in as much as
they are made to perceive that at least they have the power
notwithstanding all their weakness to inflict pain. the unfortunate
experiences a species of joy in the sense of superiority which the
manifestation of sympathy entails; his imagination is exalted; he is
always strong enough then to cause the world pain. thus is the thirst
for sympathy a thirst for self enjoyment and at the expense of ones
fellow creatures it shows man in the whole ruthlessness of his own dear
self not in his mere dullness as la rochefoucauld thinks.--in social
conversation three fourths of all the questions are asked and three
fourths of all the replies are made in order to inflict some little
pain; that is why so many people crave social intercourse it gives them
a sense of their power. in these countless but very small doses in which
the quality of badness is administered it proves a potent stimulant of
life to the same extent that well wishing--wohl-wollen distributed
through the world in like manner is one of the ever ready
restoratives.--but will many honorable people be found to admit that
there is any pleasure in administering pain that entertainment--and
rare entertainment--is not seldom found in causing others at least in
thought some pain and in raking them with the small shot of
wickedness the majority are too ignoble and a few are too good to know
anything of this pudendum the latter may consequently be prompt to
deny that prosper mrime is right when he says know also that
nothing is more common than to do wrong for the pleasure of doing it.




=how appearance becomes reality.=--the actor cannot at last refrain
even in moments of the deepest pain from thinking of the effect
produced by his deportment and by his surroundings--for example even at
the funeral of his own child he will weep at his own sorrow and its
manifestations as though he were his own audience. the hypocrite who
always plays one and the same part finally ceases to be a hypocrite; as
in the case of priests who when young men are always either
consciously or unconsciously hypocrites and finally become naturally
and then really without affectation mere priests or if the father
does not carry it to this extent the son who inherits his fathers
calling and gets the advantage of the paternal progress does. when
anyone during a long period and persistently wishes to appear
something it will at last prove difficult for him to be anything else.
the calling of almost every man even of the artist begins with
hypocrisy with an imitation of deportment with a copying of the
effective in manner. he who always wears the mask of a friendly man must
at last gain a power over friendliness of disposition without which the
expression itself of friendliness is not to be gained--and finally
friendliness of disposition gains the ascendancy over him--he _is_
benevolent.




=the point of honor in deception.=--in all great deceivers one
characteristic is prominent to which they owe their power. in the very
act of deception amid all the accompaniments the agitation in the
voice the expression the bearing in the crisis of the scene there
comes over them a belief in themselves; this it is that acts so
effectively and irresistibly upon the beholders. founders of religions
differ from such great deceivers in that they never come out of this
state of self deception or else they have very rarely a few moments
of enlightenment in which they are overcome by doubt; generally
however they soothe themselves by ascribing such moments of
enlightenment to the evil adversary. self deception must exist that both
classes of deceivers may attain far reaching results. for men believe in
the truth of all that is manifestly believed with due implicitness by
others.




=presumed degrees of truth.=--one of the most usual errors of deduction
is because someone truly and openly is against us therefore he speaks
the truth. hence the child has faith in the judgments of its elders the
christian in the assertions of the founder of the church. so too it
will not be admitted that all for which men sacrificed life and
happiness in former centuries was nothing but delusion perhaps it is
alleged these things were degrees of truth. but what is really meant is
that if a person sincerely believes a thing and has fought and died for
his faith it would be too _unjust_ if only delusion had inspired him.
such a state of affairs seems to contradict eternal justice. for that
reason the heart of a sensitive man pronounces against his head the
judgment between moral conduct and intellectual insight there must
always exist an inherent connection. it is unfortunately otherwise
for there is no eternal justice.




=falsehood.=--why do men as a rule speak the truth in the ordinary
affairs of life certainly not for the reason that a god has forbidden
lying. but because first it is more convenient as falsehood entails
invention make-believe and recollection wherefore swift says that
whoever invents a lie seldom realises the heavy burden he takes up he
must namely for every lie that he tells insert twenty more.
therefore because in plain ordinary relations of life it is expedient
to say without circumlocution i want this i have done this and the
like; therefore because the way of freedom and certainty is surer than
that of ruse.--but if it happens that a child is brought up in sinister
domestic circumstances it will then indulge in falsehood as matter of
course and involuntarily say anything its own interests may prompt an
inclination for truth an aversion to falsehood is quite foreign and
uncongenial to it and hence it lies in all innocence.




=ethic discredited for faiths sake.=--no power can sustain itself when
it is represented by mere humbugs the catholic church may possess ever
so many worldly sources of strength but its true might is comprised
in those still numberless priestly natures who make their lives stern
and strenuous and whose looks and emaciated bodies are eloquent of night
vigils fasts ardent prayer perhaps even of whip lashes these things
make men tremble and cause them anxiety what if it be really
imperative to live thus this is the dreadful question which their
aspect occasions. as they spread this doubt they lay anew the prop of
their power even the free thinkers dare not oppose such
disinterestedness with severe truth and cry thou deceived one
deceive not!--only the difference of standpoint separates them from
him no difference in goodness or badness. but things we cannot
accomplish ourselves we are apt to criticise unfairly. thus we are told
of the cunning and perverted acts of the jesuits but we overlook the
self mastery that each jesuit imposes upon himself and also the fact
that the easy life which the jesuit manuals advocate is for the benefit
not of the jesuits but the laity. indeed it may be questioned whether
we enlightened ones would become equally competent workers as the result
of similar tactics and organization and equally worthy of admiration as
the result of self mastery indefatigable industry and devotion.




=victory of knowledge over radical evil.=--it proves a material gain to
him who would attain knowledge to have had during a considerable period
the idea that mankind is a radically bad and perverted thing it is a
false idea as is its opposite but it long held sway and its roots have
reached down even to ourselves and our present world. in order to
understand _ourselves_ we must understand _it_; but in order to attain a
loftier height we must step above it. we then perceive that there is no
such thing as sin in the metaphysical sense but also in the same
sense no such thing as virtue; that this whole domain of ethical
notions is one of constant variation; that there are higher and deeper
conceptions of good and evil moral and immoral. whoever desires no more
of things than knowledge of them attains speedily to peace of mind and
will at most err through lack of knowledge but scarcely through
eagerness for knowledge or through sin as the world calls it. he will
not ask that eagerness for knowledge be interdicted and rooted out; but
his single all powerful ambition to _know_ as thoroughly and as fully
as possible will soothe him and moderate all that is strenuous in his
circumstances. moreover he is now rid of a number of disturbing
notions; he is no longer beguiled by such words as hell-pain
sinfulness unworthiness he sees in them merely the flitting shadow
pictures of false views of life and of the world.




=ethic as mans self-analysis.=--a good author whose heart is really in
his work wishes that someone would arise and wholly refute him if only
thereby his subject be wholly clarified and made plain. the maid in love
wishes that she could attest the fidelity of her own passion through
the faithlessness of her beloved. the soldier wishes to sacrifice his
life on the field of his fatherlands victory for in the victory of his
fatherland his highest end is attained. the mother gives her child what
she deprives herself of--sleep the best nourishment and in certain
circumstances her health her self.--but are all these acts unegoistic
are these moral deeds miracles because they are in schopenhauers
phrase impossible and yet accomplished is it not evident that in all
four cases man loves one part of himself a thought a longing an
experience more than he loves another part of himself that he thus
analyses his being and sacrifices one part of it to another part is
this essentially different from the behavior of the obstinate man who
says i would rather be shot than go a step out of my way for this
fellow--preference for something wish impulse longing is present
in all four instances to yield to it with all its consequences is not
unegoistic.--in the domain of the ethical man conducts himself not as
individuum but as dividuum.




=what can be promised.=--actions can be promised but not feelings for
these are involuntary. whoever promises somebody to love him always or
to hate him always or to be ever true to him promises something that
it is out of his power to bestow. but he really can promise such courses
of conduct as are the ordinary accompaniments of love of hate of
fidelity but which may also have their source in motives quite
different for various ways and motives lead to the same conduct. the
promise to love someone always means consequently as long as i love
you i will manifest the deportment of love; but if i cease to love you
my deportment although from some other motive will be just the same
so that to the people about us it will seem as if my love remained
unchanged.--hence it is the continuance of the deportment of love that
is promised in every instance in which eternal love provided no element
of self deception be involved is sworn.




=intellect and ethic.=--one must have a good memory to be able to keep
the promises one makes. one must have a strong imagination in order to
feel sympathy. so closely is ethics connected with intellectual
capacity.




=desire for vengeance and vengeance itself.=--to meditate revenge and
attain it is tantamount to an attack of fever that passes away but to
meditate revenge without possessing the strength or courage to attain it
is tantamount to suffering from a chronic malady or poisoning of body
and soul. ethics which takes only the motive into account rates both
cases alike people generally estimate the first case as the worst
because of the consequences which the deed of vengeance may entail.
both views are short sighted.




=ability to wait.=--ability to wait is so hard to acquire that great
poets have not disdained to make inability to wait the central motive of
their poems. so shakespeare in othello sophocles in ajax whose suicide
would not have seemed to him so imperative had he only been able to cool
his ardor for a day as the oracle foreboded apparently he would then
have repulsed somewhat the fearful whispers of distracted thought and
have said to himself who has not already in my situation mistaken a
sheep for a hero is it so extraordinary a thing on the contrary it is
something universally human ajax should thus have soothed himself.
passion will not wait the tragic element in the lives of great men does
not generally consist in their conflict with time and the inferiority
of their fellowmen but in their inability to put off their work a year
or two they cannot wait.--in all duels the friends who advise have but
to ascertain if the principals can wait if this be not possible a duel
is rational inasmuch as each of the combatants may say either i
continue to live and the other dies instantly or vice versa. to wait
in such circumstances would be equivalent to the frightful martyrdom of
enduring dishonor in the presence of him responsible for the dishonor
and this can easily cost more anguish than life is worth.




=glutting revenge.=--coarse men who feel a sense of injury are in the
habit of rating the extent of their injury as high as possible and of
stating the occasion of it in greatly exaggerated language in order to
be able to feast themselves on the sentiments of hatred and revenge thus
aroused.




=value of disparagement.=--not a few perhaps the majority of men find
it necessary in order to retain their self esteem and a certain
uprightness in conduct to mentally disparage and belittle all the
people they know. but as the inferior natures are in the majority and as
a great deal depends upon whether they retain or lose this uprightness
so--




=the man in a rage.=--we should be on our guard against the man who is
enraged against us as against one who has attempted our life for the
fact that we still live consists solely in the inability to kill were
looks sufficient it would have been all up with us long since. to
reduce anyone to silence by physical manifestations of savagery or by a
terrorizing process is a relic of under civilization. so too that cold
look which great personages cast upon their servitors is a remnant of
the caste distinction between man and man; a specimen of rude antiquity
women the conservers of the old have maintained this survival too
more perfectly than men.




=whither honesty may lead.=--someone once had the bad habit of
expressing himself upon occasion and with perfect honesty on the
subject of the motives of his conduct which were as good or as bad as
the motives of all men. he aroused first disfavor then suspicion
became gradually of ill repute and was pronounced a person of whom
society should beware until at last the law took note of such a
perverted being for reasons which usually have no weight with it or to
which it closes its eyes. lack of taciturnity concerning what is
universally held secret and an irresponsible predisposition to see what
no one wants to see--oneself--brought him to prison and to early death.




=punishable not punished.=--our crime against criminals consists in the
fact that we treat them as rascals.




=sancta simplicitas of virtue.=--every virtue has its privilege for
example that of contributing its own little bundle of wood to the
funeral pyre of one condemned.




=morality and consequence.=--not alone the beholders of an act generally
estimate the ethical or unethical element in it by the result no the
one who performed the act does the same. for the motives and the
intentions are seldom sufficiently apparent and amid them the memory
itself seems to become clouded by the results of the act so that a man
often ascribes the wrong motives to his acts or regards the remote
motives as the direct ones. success often imparts to an action all the
brilliance and honor of good intention while failure throws the shadow
of conscience over the most estimable deeds. hence arises the familiar
maxim of the politician give me only success with it i can win all
the noble souls over to my side--and make myself noble even in my own
eyes.--in like manner will success prove an excellent substitute for a
better argument. to this very day many well educated men think the
triumph of christianity over greek philosophy is a proof of the superior
truth of the former--although in this case it was simply the coarser and
more powerful that triumphed over the more delicate and intellectual. as
regards superiority of truth it is evident that because of it the
reviving sciences have connected themselves point for point with the
philosophy of epicurus while christianity has point for point
recoiled from it.




=love and justice.=--why is love so highly prized at the expense of
justice and why are such beautiful things spoken of the former as if it
were a far higher entity than the latter is the former not palpably a
far more stupid thing than the latter--certainly and on that very
account so much the more agreeable to everybody it is blind and has a
rich horn of plenty out of which it distributes its gifts to everyone
even when they are unmerited even when no thanks are returned. it is
impartial like the rain which according to the bible and experience
wets not alone the unjust but in certain circumstances the just as
well and to their skins at that.




=execution.=--how comes it that every execution causes us more pain than
a murder it is the coolness of the executioner the painful
preparation the perception that here a man is being used as an
instrument for the intimidation of others. for the guilt is not punished
even if there be any this is ascribable to the teachers the parents
the environment in ourselves not in the murderer--i mean the
predisposing circumstances.




=hope.=--pandora brought the box containing evils and opened it. it was
the gift of the gods to men a gift of most enticing appearance
externally and called the box of happiness. thereupon all the evils
living moving things flew out from that time to the present they fly
about and do ill to men by day and night. one evil only did not fly out
of the box pandora shut the lid at the behest of zeus and it remained
inside. now man has this box of happiness perpetually in the house and
congratulates himself upon the treasure inside of it; it is at his
service he grasps it whenever he is so disposed for he knows not that
the box which pandora brought was a box of evils. hence he looks upon
the one evil still remaining as the greatest source of happiness--it is
hope.--zeus intended that man notwithstanding the evils oppressing him
should continue to live and not rid himself of life but keep on making
himself miserable. for this purpose he bestowed hope upon man it is in
truth the greatest of evils for it lengthens the ordeal of man.




=degree of moral susceptibility unknown.=--the fact that one has or has
not had certain profoundly moving impressions and insights into
things--for example an unjustly executed slain or martyred father a
faithless wife a shattering serious accident--is the factor upon
which the excitation of our passions to white heat principally depends
as well as the course of our whole lives. no one knows to what lengths
circumstances sympathy emotion may lead him. he does not know the
full extent of his own susceptibility. wretched environment makes him
wretched. it is as a rule not the quality of our experience but its
quantity upon which depends the development of our superiority or
inferiority from the point of view of good and evil.




=the martyr against his will.=--in a certain movement there was a man
who was too cowardly and vacillating ever to contradict his comrades. he
was made use of in each emergency every sacrifice was demanded of him
because he feared the disfavor of his comrades more than he feared
death he was a petty abject spirit. they perceived this and upon the
foundation of the qualities just mentioned they elevated him to the
altitude of a hero and finally even of a martyr. although the cowardly
creature always inwardly said no he always said yes with his lips even
upon the scaffold where he died for the tenets of his party for beside
him stood one of his old associates who so domineered him with look and
word that he actually went to his death with the utmost fortitude and
has ever since been celebrated as a martyr and exalted character.




=general standard.=--one will rarely err if extreme actions be ascribed
to vanity ordinary actions to habit and mean actions to fear.




=misunderstanding of virtue.=--whoever has obtained his experience of
vice in connection with pleasure as in the case of one with a youth of
wild oats behind him comes to the conclusion that virtue must be
connected with self denial. whoever on the other hand has been very
much plagued by his passions and vices longs to find in virtue the rest
and peace of the soul. that is why it is possible for two virtuous
people to misunderstand one another wholly.




=the ascetic.=--the ascetic makes out of virtue a slavery.




=honor transferred from persons to things.=--actions prompted by love or
by the spirit of self sacrifice for others are universally honored
wherever they are manifest. hence is magnified the value set upon
whatever things may be loved or whatever things conduce to self
sacrifice although in themselves they may be worth nothing much. a
valiant army is evidence of the value of the thing it fights for.




=ambition a substitute for moral feeling.=--moral feeling should never
become extinct in natures that are destitute of ambition. the ambitious
can get along without moral feeling just as well as with it.--hence the
sons of retired ambitionless families generally become by a series of
rapid gradations when they lose moral feeling the most absolute
lunkheads.




=vanity enriches.=--how poor the human mind would be without vanity! as
it is it resembles a well stacked and ever renewed ware-emporium that
attracts buyers of every class they can find almost everything have
almost everything provided they bring with them the right kind of
money--admiration.




=senility and death.=--apart from the demands made by religion it may
well be asked why it is more honorable in an aged man who feels the
decline of his powers to await slow extinction than to fix a term to
his existence himself suicide in such a case is a quite natural and due
proceeding that ought to command respect as a triumph of reason and did
in fact command respect during the times of the masters of greek
philosophy and the bravest roman patriots who usually died by their own
hand. eagerness on the other hand to keep alive from day to day with
the anxious counsel of physicians without capacity to attain any nearer
to ones ideal of life is far less worthy of respect.--religions are
very rich in refuges from the mandate of suicide hence they ingratiate
themselves with those who cling to life.




=delusions regarding victim and regarding evil doer.=--when the rich man
takes a possession away from the poor man for example a prince who
deprives a plebeian of his beloved there arises in the mind of the poor
man a delusion he thinks the rich man must be wholly perverted to take
from him the little that he has. but the rich man appreciates the value
of a single possession much less because he is accustomed to many
possessions so that he cannot put himself in the place of the poor man
and does not act by any means as ill as the latter supposes. both have a
totally false idea of each other. the iniquities of the mighty which
bulk most largely in history are not nearly so monstrous as they seem.
the hereditary consciousness of being a superior being with superior
environment renders one very callous and lulls the conscience to rest.
we all feel when the difference between ourselves and some other being
is exceedingly great that no element of injustice can be involved and
we kill a fly with no qualms of conscience whatever. so too it is no
indication of wickedness in xerxes whom even the greeks represent as
exceptionally noble that he deprived a father of his son and had him
drawn and quartered because the latter had manifested a troublesome
ominous distrust of an entire expedition the individual was in this
case brushed aside as a pestiferous insect. he was too low and mean to
justify continued sentiments of compunction in the ruler of the world.
indeed no cruel man is ever as cruel in the main as his victim thinks.
the idea of pain is never the same as the sensation. the rule is
precisely analogous in the case of the unjust judge and of the
journalist who by means of devious rhetorical methods leads public
opinion astray. cause and effect are in all these instances entwined
with totally different series of feeling and thoughts whereas it is
unconsciously assumed that principal and victim feel and think exactly
alike and because of this assumption the guilt of the one is based upon
the pain of the other.




=the souls skin.=--as the bones flesh entrails and blood vessels are
enclosed by a skin that renders the aspect of men endurable so the
impulses and passions of the soul are enclosed by vanity it is the skin
of the soul.




=sleep of virtue.=--if virtue goes to sleep it will be more vigorous
when it awakes.




=subtlety of shame.=--men are not ashamed of obscene thoughts but they
are ashamed when they suspect that obscene thoughts are attributed to
them.




=naughtiness is rare.=--most people are too much absorbed in themselves
to be bad.




=the mite in the balance.=--we are praised or blamed as the one or the
other may be expedient for displaying to advantage our power of
discernment.




=luke  improved.=--he that humbleth himself wisheth to be exalted.




=prevention of suicide.=--there is a justice according to which we may
deprive a man of life but none that permits us to deprive him of death
this is merely cruelty.




=vanity.=--we set store by the good opinion of men first because it is
of use to us and next because we wish to give them pleasure children
their parents pupils their teacher and well disposed persons all
others generally. only when the good opinion of men is important to
somebody apart from personal advantage or the desire to give pleasure
do we speak of vanity. in this last case a man wants to give himself
pleasure but at the expense of his fellow creatures inasmuch as he
inspires them with a false opinion of himself or else inspires good
opinion in such a way that it is a source of pain to others by
arousing envy. the individual generally seeks through the opinion of
others to attest and fortify the opinion he has of himself; but the
potent influence of authority--an influence as old as man himself--leads
many also to strengthen their own opinion of themselves by means of
authority that is to borrow from others the expedient of relying more
upon the judgment of their fellow men than upon their own.--interest in
oneself the wish to please oneself attains with the vain man such
proportions that he first misleads others into a false unduly exalted
estimate of himself and then relies upon the authority of others for his
self estimate; he thus creates the delusion that he pins his faith
to.--it must however be admitted that the vain man does not desire to
please others so much as himself and he will often go so far on this
account as to overlook his own interests for he often inspires his
fellow creatures with malicious envy and renders them ill disposed in
order that he may thus increase his own delight in himself.




=limits of the love of mankind.=--every man who has declared that some
other man is an ass or a scoundrel gets angry when the other man
conclusively shows that the assertion was erroneous.




=weeping morality.=--how much delight morality occasions! think of the
ocean of pleasing tears that has flowed from the narration of noble
great-hearted deeds!--this charm of life would disappear if the belief
in complete irresponsibility gained the upper hand.




=origin of justice.=--justice reasonableness has its origin among
approximate equals in power as thucydides in the dreadful conferences
of the athenian and melian envoys has rightly conceived. thus where
there exists no demonstrable supremacy and a struggle leads but to
mutual useless damage the reflection arises that an understanding
would best be arrived at and some compromise entered into. the
reciprocal nature is hence the first nature of justice. each party makes
the other content inasmuch as each receives what it prizes more highly
than the other. each surrenders to the other what the other wants and
receives in return its own desire. justice is therefore reprisal and
exchange upon the basis of an approximate equality of power. thus
revenge pertains originally to the domain of justice as it is a sort of
reciprocity. equally so gratitude.--justice reverts naturally to the
standpoint of self preservation therefore to the egoism of this
consideration why should i injure myself to no purpose and perhaps
never attain my end--so much for the origin of justice. only because
men through mental habits have forgotten the original motive of so
called just and rational acts and also because for thousands of years
children have been brought to admire and imitate such acts have they
gradually assumed the appearance of being unegotistical. upon this
appearance is founded the high estimate of them which moreover like
all estimates is continually developing for whatever is highly
esteemed is striven for imitated made the object of self sacrifice
while the merit of the pain and emulation thus expended is by each
individual ascribed to the thing esteemed.--how slightly moral would
the world appear without forgetfulness! a poet could say that god had
posted forgetfulness as a sentinel at the portal of the temple of human
merit!




=concerning the law of the weaker.=--whenever any party for instance a
besieged city yields to a stronger party under stipulated conditions
the counter stipulation is that there be a reduction to insignificance
a burning and destruction of the city and thus a great damage inflicted
upon the stronger party. thus arises a sort of equalization principle
upon the basis of which a law can be established. the enemy has an
advantage to gain by its maintenance.--to this extent there is also a
law between slaves and masters limited only by the extent to which the
slave may be useful to his master. the law goes originally only so far
as the one party may appear to the other potent invincible stable and
the like. to such an extent then the weaker has rights but very
limited ones. hence the famous dictum that each has as much law on his
side as his power extends or more accurately as his power is believed
to extend.




=the three phases of morality hitherto.=--it is the first evidence that
the animal has become human when his conduct ceases to be based upon the
immediately expedient but upon the permanently useful; when he has
therefore grown utilitarian capable of purpose. thus is manifested the
first rule of reason. a still higher stage is attained when he regulates
his conduct upon the basis of honor by means of which he gains mastery
of himself and surrenders his desires to principles; this lifts him far
above the phase in which he was actuated only by considerations of
personal advantage as he understood it. he respects and wishes to be
respected. this means that he comprehends utility as a thing dependent
upon what his opinion of others is and their opinion of him. finally he
regulates his conduct the highest phase of morality hitherto attained
by his own standard of men and things. he himself decides for himself
and for others what is honorable and what is useful. he has become a
law giver to opinion upon the basis of his ever higher developing
conception of the utilitarian and the honorable. knowledge makes him
capable of placing the highest utility that is the universal
enduring utility before merely personal utility--of placing ennobling
recognition of the enduring and universal before the merely temporary
he lives and acts as a collective individuality.




=ethic of the developed individual.=--hitherto the altruistic has been
looked upon as the distinctive characteristic of moral conduct and it
is manifest that it was the consideration of universal utility that
prompted praise and recognition of altruistic conduct. must not a
radical departure from this point of view be imminent now that it is
being ever more clearly perceived that in the most personal
considerations the most general welfare is attained so that conduct
inspired by the most personal considerations of advantage is just the
sort which has its origin in the present conception of morality as a
universal utilitarianism to contemplate oneself as a complete
personality and bear the welfare of that personality in mind in all that
one does--this is productive of better results than any sympathetic
susceptibility and conduct in behalf of others. indeed we all suffer
from such disparagement of our own personalities which are at present
made to deteriorate from neglect. capacity is in fact divorced from
our personality in most cases and sacrificed to the state to science
to the needy as if it were the bad which deserved to be made a
sacrifice. now we are willing to labor for our fellowmen but only to
the extent that we find our own highest advantage in so doing no more
no less. the whole matter depends upon what may be understood as ones
advantage the crude undeveloped rough individualities will be the
very ones to estimate it most inadequately.




=usage and ethic.=--to be moral virtuous praiseworthy means to yield
obedience to ancient law and hereditary usage. whether this obedience be
rendered readily or with difficulty is long immaterial. enough that it
be rendered. good finally comes to mean him who acts in the
traditional manner as a result of heredity or natural disposition that
is to say does what is customary with scarcely an effort whatever that
may be for example revenges injuries when revenge as with the ancient
greeks was part of good morals. he is called good because he is good
to some purpose and as benevolence sympathy considerateness
moderation and the like come in the general course of conduct to be
finally recognized as good to some purpose as utilitarian the
benevolent man the helpful man is duly styled good. at first other
and more important kinds of utilitarian qualities stand in the
foreground. bad is not habitual unusual to do things not in
accordance with usage to oppose the traditional however rational or
the reverse the traditional may be. to do injury to ones social group
or community and to ones neighbor as thus understood is looked upon
through all the variations of moral laws in different ages as the
peculiarly immoral act so that to-day we associate the word bad
with deliberate injury to ones neighbor or community. egoistic and
non-egoistic do not constitute the fundamental opposites that have
brought mankind to make a distinction between moral and immoral good
and bad; but adherence to traditional custom and emancipation from it.
how the traditional had its origin is quite immaterial; in any event it
had no reference to good and bad or any categorical imperative but to
the all important end of maintaining and sustaining the community the
race the confederation the nation. every superstitious custom that
originated in a misinterpreted event or casualty entailed some
tradition to adhere to which is moral. to break loose from it is
dangerous more prejudicial to the community than to the individual
because divinity visits the consequences of impiety and sacrilege upon
the community rather than upon the individual. now every tradition
grows ever more venerable--the more remote is its origin the more
confused that origin is. the reverence due to it increases from
generation to generation. the tradition finally becomes holy and
inspires awe. thus it is that the precept of piety is a far loftier
morality than that inculcated by altruistic conduct.




=delight in the moral.=--a potent species of joy and thereby the source
of morality is custom. the customary is done more easily better
therefore preferably. a pleasure is felt in it and experience thus shows
that since this practice has held its own it must be good. a manner or
moral that lives and lets live is thus demonstrated advantageous
necessary in contradistinction to all new and not yet adopted
practices. the custom is therefore the blending of the agreeable and the
useful. moreover it does not require deliberation. as soon as man can
exercise compulsion he exercises it to enforce and establish his
customs for they are to him attested lifewisdom. so too a community
of individuals constrains each one of their number to adopt the same
moral or custom. the error herein is this because a certain custom has
been agreeable to the feelings or at least because it proves a means of
maintenance this custom must be imperative for it is regarded as the
only thing that can possibly be consistent with well being. the well
being of life seems to spring from it alone. this conception of the
customary as a condition of existence is carried into the slightest
detail of morality. inasmuch as insight into true causation is quite
restricted in all inferior peoples a superstitious anxiety is felt that
everything be done in due routine. even when a custom is exceedingly
burdensome it is preserved because of its supposed vital utility. it is
not known that the same degree of satisfaction can be experienced
through some other custom and even higher degrees of satisfaction too.
but it is fully appreciated that all customs do become more agreeable
with the lapse of time no matter how difficult they may have been found
in the beginning and that even the severest way of life may be rendered
a matter of habit and therefore a pleasure.




=pleasure and social instinct.=--through his relations with other men
man derives a new species of delight in those pleasurable emotions which
his own personality affords him; whereby the domain of pleasurable
emotions is made infinitely more comprehensive. no doubt he has
inherited many of these feelings from the brutes which palpably feel
delight when they sport with one another as mothers with their young.
so too the sexual relations must be taken into account they make
every young woman interesting to every young man from the standpoint of
pleasure and conversely. the feeling of pleasure originating in human
relationships makes men in general better. the delight in common the
pleasures enjoyed together heighten one another. the individual feels a
sense of security. he becomes better natured. distrust and malice
dissolve. for the man feels the sense of benefit and observes the same
feeling in others. mutual manifestations of pleasure inspire mutual
sympathy the sentiment of homogeneity. the same effect is felt also at
mutual sufferings in a common danger in stormy weather. upon such a
foundation are built the earliest alliances the object of which is the
mutual protection and safety from threatening misfortunes and the
welfare of each individual. and thus the social instinct develops from
pleasure.




=the guiltless nature of so-called bad acts.=--all bad acts are
inspired by the impulse to self preservation or more accurately by
the desire for pleasure and for the avoidance of pain in the individual.
thus are they occasioned but they are not therefore bad. pain self
prepared does not exist except in the brains of the philosophers any
more than pleasure self prepared sympathy in the schopenhauer sense.
in the condition anterior to the state we kill the creature be it man
or ape that attempts to pluck the fruit of a tree before we pluck it
ourselves should we happen to be hungry at the time and making for that
tree as we would do to-day so far as the brute is concerned if we
were wandering in savage regions.--the bad acts which most disturb us at
present do so because of the erroneous supposition that the one who is
guilty of them towards us has a free will in the matter and that it was
within his discretion not to have done these evil things. this belief in
discretionary power inspires hate thirst for revenge malice the
entire perversion of the mental processes whereas we would feel in no
way incensed against the brute as we hold it irresponsible. to inflict
pain not from the instinct of self preservation but in requital--this is
the consequence of false judgment and is equally a guiltless course of
conduct. the individual can in that condition which is anterior to the
state act with fierceness and violence for the intimidation of another
creature in order to render his own power more secure as a result of
such acts of intimidation. thus acts the powerful the superior the
original state founder who subjugates the weaker. he has the right to
do so as the state nowadays assumes the same right or to be more
accurate there is no right that can conflict with this. a foundation
for all morality can first be laid only when a stronger individuality or
a collective individuality for example society the state subjects the
single personalities hence builds upon their unification and
establishes a bond of union. morality results from compulsion it is
indeed itself one long compulsion to which obedience is rendered in
order that pain may be avoided. at first it is but custom later free
obedience and finally almost instinct. at last it is like everything
habitual and natural associated with pleasure--and is then called
virtue.




=shame.=--shame exists wherever a mystery exists but this is a
religious notion which in the earlier period of human civilization had
great vogue. everywhere there were circumscribed spots to which access
was denied on account of some divine law except in special
circumstances. at first these spots were quite extensive inasmuch as
stipulated areas could not be trod by the uninitiated who when near
them felt tremors and anxieties. this sentiment was frequently
transferred to other relationships for example to sexual relations
which as the privilege and gateway of mature age must be withdrawn
from the contemplation of youth for its own advantage relations which
many divinities were busy in preserving and sanctifying images of which
divinities were duly placed in marital chambers as guardians. in
turkish such an apartment is termed a harem or holy thing the same word
also designating the vestibule of a mosque. so too kingship is
regarded as a centre from which power and brilliance stream forth as a
mystery to the subjects impregnated with secrecy and shame sentiments
still quite operative among peoples who in other respects are without
any shame at all. so too is the whole world of inward states the
so-called soul even now for all non-philosophical persons a
mystery and during countless ages it was looked upon as a something
of divine origin in direct communion with deity. it is therefore an
adytum and occasions shame.




=judge not.=--care must be taken in the contemplation of earlier ages
that there be no falling into unjust scornfulness. the injustice in
slavery the cruelty in the subjugation of persons and peoples must not
be estimated by our standard. for in that period the instinct of justice
was not so highly developed. who dare reproach the genoese calvin for
burning the physician servetus at the stake it was a proceeding growing
out of his convictions. and the inquisition too had its justification.
the only thing is that the prevailing views were false and led to those
proceedings which seem so cruel to us simply because such views have
become foreign to us. besides what is the burning alive of one
individual compared with eternal hell pains for everybody else and yet
this idea then had hold of all the world without in the least vitiating
with its frightfulness the other idea of a god. even we nowadays are
hard and merciless to political revolutionists but that is because we
are in the habit of believing the state a necessity and hence the
cruelty of the proceeding is not so much understood as in the other
cases where the points of view are repudiated. the cruelty to animals
shown by children and italians is due to the same misunderstanding. the
animal owing to the exigencies of the church catechism is placed too
far below the level of mankind.--much too that is frightful and
inhuman in history and which is almost incredible is rendered less
atrocious by the reflection that the one who commands and the one who
executes are different persons. the former does not witness the
performance and hence it makes no strong impression on him. the latter
obeys a superior and hence feels no responsibility. most princes and
military chieftains appear through lack of true perception cruel and
hard without really being so.--egoism is not bad because the idea of the
neighbor--the word is of christian origin and does not correspond to
truth--is very weak in us and we feel ourselves in regard to him as
free from responsibility as if plants and stones were involved. that
another is in suffering must be learned and it can never be wholly
learned.




=man always does right.=--we do not blame nature when she sends a
thunder storm and makes us wet why then do we term the man who inflicts
injury immoral because in the latter case we assume a voluntary
ruling free will and in the former necessity. but this distinction is
a delusion. moreover even the intentional infliction of injury is not
in all circumstances termed immoral. thus we kill a fly intentionally
without thinking very much about it simply because its buzzing about is
disagreeable; and we punish a criminal and inflict pain upon him in
order to protect ourselves and society. in the first case it is the
individual who for the sake of preserving himself or in order to spare
himself pain does injury with design in the second case it is the
state. all ethic deems intentional infliction of injury justified by
necessity; that is when it is a matter of self preservation. but these
two points of view are sufficient to explain all bad acts done by man to
men. it is desired to obtain pleasure or avoid pain. in any sense it is
a question always of self preservation. socrates and plato are right
whatever man does he always does right that is does what seems to him
good advantageous according to the degree of advancement his intellect
has attained which is always the measure of his rational capacity.




=the inoffensive in badness.=--badness has not for its object the
infliction of pain upon others but simply our own satisfaction as for
instance in the case of thirst for vengeance or of nerve excitation.
every act of teasing shows what pleasure is caused by the display of
our power over others and what feelings of delight are experienced in
the sense of domination. is there then anything immoral in feeling
pleasure in the pain of others is malicious joy devilish as
schopenhauer says in the realm of nature we feel joy in breaking
boughs shattering rocks fighting with wild beasts simply to attest
our strength thereby. should not the knowledge that another suffers on
our account here in this case make the same kind of act which by
the way arouses no qualms of conscience in us immoral also but if we
had not this knowledge there would be no pleasure in ones own
superiority or power for this pleasure is experienced only in the
suffering of another as in the case of teasing. all pleasure is in
itself neither good nor bad. whence comes the conviction that one
should not cause pain in others in order to feel pleasure oneself
simply from the standpoint of utility that is in consideration of the
consequences of ultimate pain since the injured party or state will
demand satisfaction and revenge. this consideration alone can have led
to the determination to renounce such pleasure.--sympathy has the
satisfaction of others in view no more than as already stated badness
has the pain of others in view. for there are at least two perhaps many
more elementary ingredients in personal gratification which enter
largely into our self satisfaction one of them being the pleasure of
the emotion of which species is sympathy with tragedy and another
when the impulse is to action being the pleasure of exercising ones
power. should a sufferer be very dear to us we divest ourselves of pain
by the performance of acts of sympathy.--with the exception of some few
philosophers men have placed sympathy very low in the rank of moral
feelings and rightly.




=self defence.=--if self defence is in general held a valid
justification then nearly every manifestation of so called immoral
egoism must be justified too. pain is inflicted robbery or killing
done in order to maintain life or to protect oneself and ward off harm.
a man lies when cunning and delusion are valid means of self
preservation. to injure intentionally when our safety and our existence
are involved or the continuance of our well being is conceded to be
moral. the state itself injures from this motive when it hangs
criminals. in unintentional injury the immoral of course can not be
present as accident alone is involved. but is there any sort of
intentional injury in which our existence and the maintenance of our
well being be not involved is there such a thing as injuring from
absolute badness for example in the case of cruelty if a man does not
know what pain an act occasions that act is not one of wickedness. thus
the child is not bad to the animal not evil. it disturbs and rends it
as if it were one of its playthings. does a man ever fully know how much
pain an act may cause another as far as our nervous system extends we
shield ourselves from pain. if it extended further that is to our
fellow men we would never cause anyone else any pain except in such
cases as we cause it to ourselves when we cut ourselves surgically to
heal our ills or strive and trouble ourselves to gain health. we
conclude from analogy that something pains somebody and can in
consequence through recollection and the power of imagination feel
pain also. but what a difference there always is between the tooth ache
and the pain sympathy that the spectacle of tooth ache occasions!
therefore when injury is inflicted from so called badness the degree of
pain thereby experienced is always unknown to us in so far however as
pleasure is felt in the act a sense of ones own power of ones own
excitation the act is committed to maintain the well being of the
individual and hence comes under the purview of self defence and lying
for self preservation. without pleasure there is no life; the struggle
for pleasure is the struggle for life. whether the individual shall
carry on this struggle in such a way that he be called good or in such a
way that he be called bad is something that the standard and the
capacity of his own intellect must determine for him.




=justice that rewards.=--whoever has fully understood the doctrine of
absolute irresponsibility can no longer include the so called rewarding
and punishing justice in the idea of justice if the latter be taken to
mean that to each be given his due. for he who is punished does not
deserve the punishment. he is used simply as a means to intimidate
others from certain acts. equally he who is rewarded does not merit the
reward. he could not act any differently than he did act. hence the
reward has only the significance of an encouragement to him and others
as a motive for subsequent acts. the praise is called out only to him
who is running in the race and not to him who has arrived at the goal.
something that comes to someone as his own is neither a punishment nor a
reward. it is given to him from utiliarian considerations without his
having any claim to it in justice. hence one must say the wise man
praises not because a good act has been done precisely as was once
said the wise man punishes not because a bad act has been done but in
order that a bad act may not be done. if punishment and reward ceased
there would cease with them the most powerful incentives to certain acts
and away from other acts. the purposes of men demand their continuance
of punishment and reward and inasmuch as punishment and reward blame
and praise operate most potently upon vanity these same purposes of men
imperatively require the continuance of vanity.




=the water fall.=--at the sight of a water fall we may opine that in the
countless curves spirations and dashes of the waves we behold freedom
of the will and of the impulses. but everything is compulsory
everything can be mathematically calculated. thus it is too with human
acts. we would be able to calculate in advance every single action if we
were all knowing as well as every advance in knowledge every delusion
every bad deed. the acting individual himself is held fast in the
illusion of volition. if on a sudden the entire movement of the world
stopped short and an all knowing and reasoning intelligence were there
to take advantage of this pause he could foretell the future of every
being to the remotest ages and indicate the path that would be taken in
the worlds further course. the deception of the acting individual as
regards himself the assumption of the freedom of the will is a part of
this computable mechanism.




=non-responsibility and non-guilt.=--the absolute irresponsibility of
man for his acts and his nature is the bitterest drop in the cup of him
who has knowledge if he be accustomed to behold in responsibility and
duty the patent of nobility of his human nature. all his estimates
preferences dislikes are thus made worthless and false. his deepest
sentiment with which he honored the sufferer the hero sprang from an
error. he may no longer praise no longer blame for it is irrational to
blame and praise nature and necessity. just as he cherishes the
beautiful work of art but does not praise it as it is incapable of
doing anything for itself just as he stands in the presence of plants
he must stand in the presence of human conduct his own included. he may
admire strength beauty capacity therein but he can discern no merit.
the chemical process and the conflict of the elements the ordeal of
the invalid who strives for convalescence are no more merits than the
soul-struggles and extremities in which one is torn this way and that by
contending motives until one finally decides in favor of the
strongest--as the phrase has it although in fact it is the strongest
motive that decides for us. all these motives however whatever fine
names we may give them have grown from the same roots in which we
believe the baneful poisons lurk. between good and bad actions there is
no difference in kind but at most in degree. good acts are sublimated
evil. bad acts are degraded imbruted good. the very longing of the
individual for self gratification together with the fear of being
deprived of it obtains satisfaction in all circumstances let the
individual act as he may that is as he must be it in deeds of vanity
revenge pleasure utility badness cunning be it in deeds of self
sacrifice sympathy or knowledge. the degrees of rational capacity
determine the direction in which this longing impels every society
every individual has constantly present a comparative classification of
benefits in accordance with which conduct is determined and others are
judged. but this standard perpetually changes. many acts are called bad
that are only stupid because the degree of intelligence that decided
for them was low. indeed in a certain sense all acts now are stupid
for the highest degree of human intelligence that has yet been attained
will in time most certainly be surpassed and then in retrospection all
our present conduct and opinion will appear as narrow and petty as we
now deem the conduct and opinion of savage peoples and ages.--to
perceive all these things may occasion profound pain but there is
nevertheless a consolation. such pains are birth pains. the butterfly
insists upon breaking through the cocoon he presses through it tears
it to pieces only to be blinded and confused by the strange light by
the realm of liberty. by such men as are capable of this sadness--how
few there are!--will the first attempt be made to see if humanity may
convert itself from a thing of morality to a thing of wisdom. the sun of
a new gospel sheds its first ray upon the loftiest height in the souls
of those few but the clouds are massed there too thicker than ever
and not far apart are the brightest sunlight and the deepest gloom.
everything is necessity--so says the new knowledge and this knowledge
is itself necessity. all is guiltlessness and knowledge is the way to
insight into this guiltlessness. if pleasure egoism vanity be
necessary to attest the moral phenomena and their richest blooms the
instinct for truth and accuracy of knowledge; if delusion and confusion
of the imagination were the only means whereby mankind could gradually
lift itself up to this degree of self enlightenment and self
emancipation--who would venture to disparage the means who would have
the right to feel sad if made aware of the goal to which those paths
lead everything in the domain of ethic is evolved changeable
tottering; all things flow it is true--but all things are also in the
stream to their goal. though within us the hereditary habit of
erroneous judgment love hate may be ever dominant yet under the
influence of awaking knowledge it will ever become weaker a new habit
that of understanding not-loving not-hating looking from above grows
up within us gradually and in the same soil and may perhaps in
thousands of years be powerful enough to endow mankind with capacity to
develop the wise guiltless man conscious of guiltlessness as
unfailingly as it now developes the unwise irrational guilt-conscious
man--that is to say the necessary higher step not the opposite of it.




the religious life.




=the double contest against evil.=--if an evil afflicts us we can either
so deal with it as to remove its cause or else so deal with it that its
effect upon our feeling is changed hence look upon the evil as a
benefit of which the uses will perhaps first become evident in some
subsequent period. religion and art and also the metaphysical
philosophy strive to effect an alteration of the feeling partly by an
alteration of our judgment respecting the experience for example with
the aid of the dictum whom god loves he chastizes partly by the
awakening of a joy in pain in emotion especially whence the art of
tragedy had its origin. the more one is disposed to interpret away and
justify the less likely he is to look directly at the causes of evil
and eliminate them. an instant alleviation and narcotizing of pain as
is usual in the case of tooth ache is sufficient for him even in the
severest suffering. the more the domination of religions and of all
narcotic arts declines the more searchingly do men look to the
elimination of evil itself which is a rather bad thing for the tragic
poets--for there is ever less and less material for tragedy since the
domain of unsparing immutable destiny grows constantly more
circumscribed--and a still worse thing for the priests for these last
have lived heretofore upon the narcoticizing of human ill.




=sorrow is knowledge.=--how willingly would not one exchange the false
assertions of the homines religiosi that there is a god who commands us
to be good who is the sentinel and witness of every act every moment
every thought who loves us who plans our welfare in every
misfortune--how willingly would not one exchange these for truths as
healing beneficial and grateful as those delusions! but there are no
such truths. philosophy can at most set up in opposition to them other
metaphysical plausibilities fundamental untruths as well. the tragedy
of it all is that although one cannot believe these dogmas of religion
and metaphysics if one adopts in heart and head the potent methods of
truth one has yet become through human evolution so tender
susceptible sensitive as to stand in need of the most effective means
of rest and consolation. from this state of things arises the danger
that through the perception of truth or more accurately seeing
through delusion one may bleed to death. byron has put this into
deathless verse

     sorrow is knowledge they who know the most
     must mourn the deepest oer the fatal truth
     the tree of knowledge is not that of life.

against such cares there is no better protective than the light fancy of
horace at any rate during the darkest hours and sun eclipses of the
soul expressed in the words

     quid aeternis minorem
     consiliis animum fatigas
     cur non sub alta vel platano vel hac
     pinu jacentes.

 then wherefore should you who are mortal outwear
     your soul with a profitless burden of care
     say why should we not flung at ease neath this pine
     or a plane-trees broad umbrage quaff gaily our wine
                      translation of sir theodore martin.

at any rate light fancy or heavy heartedness of any degree must be
better than a romantic retrogression and desertion of ones flag an
approach to christianity in any form for with it in the present state
of knowledge one can have nothing to do without hopelessly defiling
ones intellectual integrity and surrendering it unconditionally. these
woes may be painful enough but without pain one cannot become a leader
and guide of humanity and woe to him who would be such and lacks this
pure integrity of the intellect!




=the truth in religion.=--in the ages of enlightenment justice was not
done to the importance of religion of this there can be no doubt. it is
also equally certain that in the ensuing reaction of enlightenment the
demands of justice were far exceeded inasmuch as religion was treated
with love even with infatuation and proclaimed as a profound indeed
the most profound knowledge of the world which science had but to
divest of its dogmatic garb in order to possess truth in its
unmythical form. religions must therefore--this was the contention of
all foes of enlightenment--sensu allegorico with regard for the
comprehension of the masses give expression to that ancient truth which
is wisdom in itself inasmuch as all science of modern times has led up
to it instead of away from it. so that between the most ancient wisdom
of man and all later wisdom there prevails harmony even similarity of
viewpoint; and the advancement of knowledge--if one be disposed to
concede such a thing--has to do not with its nature but with its
propagation. this whole conception of religion and science is through
and through erroneous and none would to-day be hardy enough to
countenance it had not schopenhauers rhetoric taken it under
protection this high sounding rhetoric which now gains auditors after
the lapse of a generation. much as may be gained from schopenhauers
religio-ethical human and cosmical oracle as regards the comprehension
of christianity and other religions it is nevertheless certain that he
erred regarding the value of religion to knowledge. he himself was in
this but a servile pupil of the scientific teachers of his time who had
all taken romanticism under their protection and renounced the spirit of
enlightenment. had he been born in our own time it would have been
impossible for him to have spoken of the sensus allegoricus of religion.
he would instead have done truth the justice to say never has a
religion directly or indirectly either as dogma or as allegory
contained a truth. for all religions grew out of dread or necessity and
came into existence through an error of the reason. they have perhaps
in times of danger from science incorporated some philosophical
doctrine or other into their systems in order to make it possible to
continue ones existence within them. but this is but a theological work
of art dating from the time in which a religion began to doubt of
itself. these theological feats of art which are most common in
christianity as the religion of a learned age impregnated with
philosophy have led to this superstition of the sensus allegoricus as
has even more the habit of the philosophers namely those
half-natures the poetical philosophers and the philosophising artists
of dealing with their own feelings as if they constituted the
fundamental nature of humanity and hence of giving their own religious
feelings a predominant influence over the structure of their systems. as
the philosophers mostly philosophised under the influence of hereditary
religious habits or at least under the traditional influence of this
metaphysical necessity they naturally arrived at conclusions
closely resembling the judaic or christian or indian religious
tenets--resembling in the way that children are apt to look like their
mothers only in this case the fathers were not certain as to the
maternity as easily happens--but in the innocence of their admiration
they fabled regarding the family likeness of all religion and science.
in reality there exists between religion and true science neither
relationship nor friendship not even enmity they dwell in different
spheres. every philosophy that lets the religious comet gleam through
the darkness of its last outposts renders everything within it that
purports to be science suspicious. it is all probably religion
although it may assume the guise of science.--moreover though all the
peoples agree concerning certain religious things for example the
existence of a god which by the way as regards this point is not
the case this fact would constitute an argument against the thing
agreed upon for example the very existence of a god. the consensus
gentium and especially hominum can probably amount only to an absurdity.
against it there is no consensus omnium sapientium whatever on any
point with the exception of which goethes verse speaks

     all greatest sages to all latest ages
         will smile wink and slily agree
     tis folly to wait till a fools empty pate
         has learned to be knowing and free.
     so children of wisdom must look upon fools
     as creatures whore never the better for schools.

stated without rhyme or metre and adapted to our case the consensus
sapientium is to the effect that the consensus gentium amounts to an
absurdity.




=origin of religious worship.=--let us transport ourselves back to the
times in which religious life flourished most vigorously and we will
find a fundamental conviction prevalent which we no longer share and
which has resulted in the closing of the door to religious life once for
all so far as we are concerned this conviction has to do with nature
and intercourse with her. in those times nothing is yet known of
natures laws. neither for earth nor for heaven is there a must. a
season sunshine rain can come or stay away as it pleases. there is
wanting in particular all idea of natural causation. if a man rows it
is not the oar that moves the boat but rowing is a magical ceremony
whereby a demon is constrained to move the boat. all illness death
itself is a consequence of magical influences. in sickness and death
nothing natural is conceived. the whole idea of natural course is
wanting. the idea dawns first upon the ancient greeks that is to say in
a very late period of humanity in the conception of a moira fate
ruling over the gods. if any person shoots off a bow there is always an
irrational strength and agency in the act. if the wells suddenly run
dry the first thought is of subterranean demons and their pranks. it
must have been the dart of a god beneath whose invisible influence a
human being suddenly collapses. in india the carpenter according to
lubbock is in the habit of making devout offerings to his hammer and
hatchet. a brahmin treats the plume with which he writes a soldier the
weapon that he takes into the field a mason his trowel a laborer his
plow in the same way. all nature is in the opinion of religious
people a sum total of the doings of conscious and willing beings an
immense mass of complex volitions. in regard to all that takes place
outside of us no conclusion is permissible that anything will result
thus and so must result thus and so that we are comparatively
calculable and certain in our experiences that man is the rule nature
the ruleless. this view forms the fundamental conviction that dominates
crude religion-producing early civilizations. we contemporary men feel
exactly the opposite the richer man now feels himself inwardly the
more polyphone the music and the sounding of his soul the more
powerfully does the uniformity of nature impress him. we all with
goethe recognize in nature the great means of repose for the soul. we
listen to the pendulum stroke of this great clock with longing for rest
for absolute calm and quiescence as if we could drink in the uniformity
of nature and thereby arrive first at an enjoyment of oneself. formerly
it was the reverse if we carry ourselves back to the periods of crude
civilization or if we contemplate contemporary savages we will find
them most strongly influenced by rule by tradition. the individual is
almost automatically bound to rule and tradition and moves with the
uniformity of a pendulum. to him nature--the uncomprehended fearful
mysterious nature--must seem the domain of freedom of volition of
higher power indeed as an ultra-human degree of destiny as god. every
individual in such periods and circumstances feels that his existence
his happiness the existence and happiness of the family the state
the success or failure of every undertaking must depend upon these
dispositions of nature. certain natural events must occur at the proper
time and certain others must not occur. how can influence be exercised
over this fearful unknown how can this domain of freedom be brought
under subjection thus he asks himself thus he worries is there no
means to render these powers of nature as subject to rule and tradition
as you are yourself--the cogitation of the superstitious and
magic-deluded man is upon the theme of imposing a law upon nature and
to put it briefly religious worship is the result of such cogitation.
the problem which is present to every man is closely connected with this
one how can the weaker party dictate laws to the stronger control its
acts in reference to the weaker at first the most harmless form of
influence is recollected that influence which is acquired when the
partiality of anyone has been won. through beseeching and prayer
through abject humiliation through obligations to regular gifts and
propitiations through flattering homages it is possible therefore to
impose some guidance upon the forces of nature to the extent that their
partiality be won love binds and is bound. then agreements can be
entered into by means of which certain courses of conduct are mutually
concluded vows are made and authorities prescribed. but far more potent
is that species of power exercised by means of magic and incantation. as
a man is able to injure a powerful enemy by means of the magician and
render him helpless with fear as the love potion operates at a
distance so can the mighty forces of nature in the opinion of weaker
mankind be controlled by similar means. the principal means of
effecting incantations is to acquire control of something belonging to
the party to be influenced hair finger nails food from his table
even his picture or his name. with such apparatus it is possible to act
by means of magic for the basic principle is that to everything
spiritual corresponds something corporeal. with the aid of this
corporeal element the spirit may be bound injured or destroyed. the
corporeal affords the handle by which the spiritual can be laid hold of.
in the same way that man influences mankind does he influences some
spirit of nature for this latter has also its corporeal element that
can be grasped. the tree and on the same basis the seed from which it
grew this puzzling sequence seems to demonstrate that in both forms the
same spirit is embodied now large now small. a stone that suddenly
rolls is the body in which the spirit works. does a huge boulder lie in
a lonely moor it is impossible to think of mortal power having placed
it there. the stone must have moved itself there. that is to say some
spirit must dominate it. everything that has a body is subject to magic
including therefore the spirits of nature. if a god is directly
connected with his portrait a direct influence by refraining from
devout offerings by whippings chainings and the like can be brought
to bear upon him. the lower classes in china tie cords around the
picture of their god in order to defy his departing favor when he has
left them in the lurch and tear the picture to pieces drag it through
the streets into dung heaps and gutters crying you dog of a spirit
we housed you in a beautiful temple we gilded you prettily we fed you
well we brought you offerings and yet how ungrateful you are! similar
displays of resentment have been made against pictures of the mother of
god and pictures of saints in catholic countries during the present
century when such pictures would not do their duty during times of
pestilence and drought.

through all these magical relationships to nature countless ceremonies
are occasioned and finally when their complexity and confusion grow
too great pains are taken to systematize them to arrange them so that
the favorable course of natures progress namely the great yearly
circle of the seasons may be brought about by a corresponding course of
the ceremonial progress. the aim of religious worship is to influence
nature to human advantage and hence to instil a subjection to law into
her that originally she has not whereas at present man desires to find
out the subjection to law of nature in order to guide himself thereby.
in brief the system of religious worship rests upon the idea of magic
between man and man and the magician is older than the priest. but it
rests equally upon other and higher ideas. it brings into prominence the
sympathetic relation of man to man the existence of benevolence
gratitude prayer of truces between enemies of loans upon security of
arrangements for the protection of property. man even in very inferior
degrees of civilization does not stand in the presence of nature as a
helpless slave he is not willy-nilly the absolute servant of nature. in
the greek development of religion especially in the relationship to the
olympian gods it becomes possible to entertain the idea of an existence
side by side of two castes a higher more powerful and a lower less
powerful but both are bound together in some way on account of their
origin and are one species. they need not be ashamed of one another.
this is the element of distinction in greek religion.




=at the contemplation of certain ancient sacrificial proceedings.=--how
many sentiments are lost to us is manifest in the union of the farcical
even of the obscene with the religious feeling. the feeling that this
mixture is possible is becoming extinct. we realize the mixture only
historically in the mysteries of demeter and dionysos and in the
christian easter festivals and religious mysteries. but we still
perceive the sublime in connection with the ridiculous and the like
the emotional with the absurd. perhaps a later age will be unable to
understand even these combinations.




=christianity as antiquity.=--when on a sunday morning we hear the old
bells ringing we ask ourselves is it possible all this for a jew
crucified two thousand years ago who said he was gods son the proof of
such an assertion is lacking.--certainly the christian religion
constitutes in our time a protruding bit of antiquity from very remote
ages and that its assertions are still generally believed--although men
have become so keen in the scrutiny of claims--constitutes the oldest
relic of this inheritance. a god who begets children by a mortal woman;
a sage who demands that no more work be done that no more justice be
administered but that the signs of the approaching end of the world be
heeded; a system of justice that accepts an innocent as a vicarious
sacrifice in the place of the guilty; a person who bids his disciples
drink his blood; prayers for miracles; sins against a god expiated upon
a god; fear of a hereafter to which death is the portal; the figure of
the cross as a symbol in an age that no longer knows the purpose and the
ignominy of the cross--how ghostly all these things flit before us out
of the grave of their primitive antiquity! is one to believe that such
things can still be believed




=the un-greek in christianity.=--the greeks did not look upon the
homeric gods above them as lords nor upon themselves beneath as
servants after the fashion of the jews. they saw but the counterpart as
in a mirror of the most perfect specimens of their own caste hence an
ideal but no contradiction of their own nature. there was a feeling of
mutual relationship resulting in a mutual interest a sort of alliance.
man thinks well of himself when he gives himself such gods and places
himself in a relationship akin to that of the lower nobility with the
higher; whereas the italian races have a decidedly vulgar religion
involving perpetual anxiety because of bad and mischievous powers and
soul disturbers. wherever the olympian gods receded into the background
there even greek life became gloomier and more perturbed.--christianity
on the other hand oppressed and degraded humanity completely and sank
it into deepest mire into the feeling of utter abasement it suddenly
flashed the gleam of divine compassion so that the amazed and
grace-dazzled stupefied one gave a cry of delight and for a moment
believed that the whole of heaven was within him. upon this unhealthy
excess of feeling upon the accompanying corruption of heart and head
christianity attains all its psychological effects. it wants to
annihilate debase stupefy amaze bedazzle. there is but one thing
that it does not want measure standard das maas and therefore is it
in the worst sense barbarous asiatic vulgar un-greek.




=being religious to some purpose.=--there are certain insipid
traffic-virtuous people to whom religion is pinned like the hem of some
garb of a higher humanity. these people do well to remain religious it
adorns them. all who are not versed in some professional
weapon--including tongue and pen as weapons--are servile to all such
the christian religion is very useful for then their servility assumes
the aspect of christian virtue and is amazingly adorned.--people whose
daily lives are empty and colorless are readily religious. this is
comprehensible and pardonable but they have no right to demand that
others whose daily lives are not empty and colorless should be
religious also.




=the everyday christian.=--if christianity with its allegations of an
avenging god universal sinfulness choice of grace and the danger of
eternal damnation were true it would be an indication of weakness of
mind and character not to be a priest or an apostle or a hermit and
toil for ones own salvation. it would be irrational to lose sight of
ones eternal well being in comparison with temporary advantage
assuming these dogmas to be generally believed the every day christian
is a pitiable figure a man who really cannot count as far as three and
who for the rest just because of his intellectual incapacity does not
deserve to be as hard punished as christianity promises he shall be.




=concerning the cleverness of christianity.=--it is a master stroke of
christianity to so emphasize the unworthiness sinfulness and
degradation of men in general that contempt of ones fellow creatures
becomes impossible. he may sin as much as he pleases he is not by
nature different from me. it is i who in every way am unworthy and
contemptible. so says the christian to himself. but even this feeling
has lost its keenest sting for the christian does not believe in his
individual degradation. he is bad in his general human capacity and he
soothes himself a little with the assertion that we are all alike.




=personal change.=--as soon as a religion rules it has for its
opponents those who were its first disciples.




=fate of christianity.=--christianity arose to lighten the heart but
now it must first make the heart heavy in order to be able to lighten it
afterwards. christianity will consequently go down.




=the testimony of pleasure.=--the agreeable opinion is accepted as true.
this is the testimony of pleasure or as the church says the evidence
of strength of which all religions are so proud although they should
all be ashamed of it. if a belief did not make blessed it would not be
believed. how little it would be worth then!




=dangerous play.=--whoever gives religious feeling room must then also
let it grow. he can do nothing else. then his being gradually changes.
the religious element brings with it affinities and kinships. the whole
circle of his judgment and feeling is clouded and draped in religious
shadows. feeling cannot stand still. one should be on ones guard.




=the blind pupil.=--as long as one knows very well the strength and the
weakness of ones dogma ones art ones religion its strength is
still low. the pupil and apostle who has no eye for the weaknesses of a
dogma a religion and so on dazzled by the aspect of the master and by
his own reverence for him has on that very account generally more
power than the master. without blind pupils the influence of a man and
his work has never become great. to give victory to knowledge often
amounts to no more than so allying it with stupidity that the brute
force of the latter forces triumph for the former.




=the breaking off of churches.=--there is not sufficient religion in the
world merely to put an end to the number of religions.




=sinlessness of men.=--if one have understood how sin came into the
world namely through errors of the reason through which men in their
intercourse with one another and even individual men looked upon
themselves as much blacker and wickeder than was really the case ones
whole feeling is much lightened and man and the world appear together in
such a halo of harmlessness that a sentiment of well being is instilled
into ones whole nature. man in the midst of nature is as a child left
to its own devices. this child indeed dreams a heavy anxious dream. but
when it opens its eyes it finds itself always in paradise.




=irreligiousness of artists.=--homer is so much at home among his gods
and is as a poet so good natured to them that he must have been
profoundly irreligious. that which was brought to him by the popular
faith--a mean crude and partially repulsive superstition--he dealt with
as freely as the sculptor with his clay therefore with the same freedom
that schylus and aristophanes evinced and with which in later times the
great artists of the renaissance and also shakespeare and goethe drew
their pictures.




=art and strength of false interpretation.=--all the visions fears
exhaustions and delights of the saint are well known symptoms of
sickness which in him owing to deep rooted religious and psychological
delusions are explained quite differently that is not as symptoms of
sickness.--so too perhaps the demon of socrates was nothing but a
malady of the ear that he explained in view of his predominant moral
theory in a manner different from what would be thought rational
to-day. nor is the case different with the frenzy and the frenzied
speeches of the prophets and of the priests of the oracles. it is always
the degree of wisdom imagination capacity and morality in the heart
and mind of the interpreters that got so much out of them. it is among
the greatest feats of the men who are called geniuses and saints that
they made interpreters for themselves who fortunately for mankind did
not understand them.




=reverence for madness.=--because it was perceived that an excitement of
some kind often made the head clearer and occasioned fortunate
inspirations it was concluded that the utmost excitement would occasion
the most fortunate inspirations. hence the frenzied being was revered as
a sage and an oracle giver. a false conclusion lies at the bottom of all
this.




=promises of wisdom.=--modern science has as its object as little pain
as possible as long a life as possible--hence a sort of eternal
blessedness but of a very limited kind in comparison with the promises
of religion.




=forbidden generosity.=--there is not enough of love and goodness in the
world to throw any of it away on conceited people.




=survival of religious training in the disposition.=--the catholic
church and before it all ancient education controlled the whole domain
of means through which man was put into certain unordinary moods and
withdrawn from the cold calculation of personal advantage and from calm
rational reflection. a church vibrating with deep tones; gloomy
regular restraining exhortations from a priestly band who
involuntarily communicate their own tension to their congregation and
lead them to listen almost with anxiety as if some miracle were in
course of preparation; the awesome pile of architecture which as the
house of a god rears itself vastly into the vague and in all its
shadowy nooks inspires fear of its nerve-exciting power--who would care
to reduce men to the level of these things if the ideas upon which they
rest became extinct but the results of all these things are
nevertheless not thrown away the inner world of exalted emotional
prophetic profoundly repentant hope-blessed moods has become inborn in
man largely through cultivation. what still exists in his soul was
formerly as he germinated grew and bloomed thoroughly disciplined.




=religious after-pains.=--though one believe oneself absolutely weaned
away from religion the process has yet not been so thorough as to make
impossible a feeling of joy at the presence of religious feelings and
dispositions without intelligible content as for example in music;
and if a philosophy alleges to us the validity of metaphysical hopes
through the peace of soul therein attainable and also speaks of the
whole true gospel in the look of raphaels madonna we greet such
declarations and innuendoes with a welcome smile. the philosopher has
here a matter easy of demonstration. he responds with that which he is
glad to give namely a heart that is glad to accept. hence it is
observable how the less reflective free spirits collide only with dogmas
but yield readily to the magic of religious feelings; it is a source of
pain to them to let the latter go simply on account of the
former.--scientific philosophy must be very much on its guard lest on
account of this necessity--an evolved and hence also a transitory
necessity--delusions are smuggled in. even logicians speak of
presentiments of truth in ethics and in art for example of the
presentiment that the essence of things is unity a thing which
nevertheless ought to be prohibited. between carefully deduced truths
and such foreboded things there lies the abysmal distinction that the
former are products of the intellect and the latter of the necessity.
hunger is no evidence that there is food at hand to appease it. hunger
merely craves food. presentiment does not denote that the existence of
a thing is known in any way whatever. it denotes merely that it is
deemed possible to the extent that it is desired or feared. the
presentiment is not one step forward in the domain of certainty.--it
is involuntarily believed that the religious tinted sections of a
philosophy are better attested than the others but the case is at
bottom just the opposite there is simply the inner wish that it may be
so that the thing which beautifies may also be true. this wish leads us
to accept bad grounds as good.




=of the christian need of salvation.=--careful consideration must render
it possible to propound some explanation of that process in the soul of
a christian which is termed need of salvation and to propound an
explanation too free from mythology hence one purely psychological.
heretofore psychological explanations of religious conditions and
processes have really been in disrepute inasmuch as a theology calling
itself free gave vent to its unprofitable nature in this domain; for its
principal aim so far as may be judged from the spirit of its creator
schleier-macher was the preservation of the christian religion and the
maintenance of the christian theology. it appeared that in the
psychological analysis of religious facts a new anchorage and above
all a new calling were to be gained. undisturbed by such predecessors
we venture the following exposition of the phenomena alluded to. man is
conscious of certain acts which are very firmly implanted in the general
course of conduct indeed he discovers in himself a predisposition to
such acts that seems to him to be as unalterable as his very being. how
gladly he would essay some other kind of acts which in the general
estimate of conduct are rated the best and highest how gladly he would
welcome the consciousness of well doing which ought to follow unselfish
motive! unfortunately however it goes no further than this longing
the discontent consequent upon being unable to satisfy it is added to
all other kinds of discontent which result from his life destiny in
particular or which may be due to so called bad acts; so that a deep
depression ensues accompanied by a desire for some physician to remove
it and all its causes.--this condition would not be found so bitter if
the individual but compared himself freely with other men for then he
would have no reason to be discontented with himself in particular as he
is merely bearing his share of the general burden of human discontent
and incompleteness. but he compares himself with a being who alone must
be capable of the conduct that is called unegoistic and of an enduring
consciousness of unselfish motive with god. it is because he gazes into
this clear mirror that his own self seems so extraordinarily distracted
and so troubled. thereupon the thought of that being in so far as it
flits before his fancy as retributive justice occasions him anxiety. in
every conceivable small and great experience he believes he sees the
anger of the being his threats the very implements and manacles of his
judge and prison. what succors him in this danger which in the
prospect of an eternal duration of punishment transcends in hideousness
all the horrors that can be presented to the imagination




before we consider this condition in its further effects we would admit
to ourselves that man is betrayed into this condition not through his
fault and sin but through a series of delusions of the reason; that
it was the fault of the mirror if his own self appeared to him in the
highest degree dark and hateful and that that mirror was his own work
the very imperfect work of human imagination and judgment. in the first
place a being capable of absolutely unegoistic conduct is as fabulous as
the phoenix. such a being is not even thinkable for the very reason that
the whole notion of unegoistic conduct when closely examined
vanishes into air. never yet has a man done anything solely for others
and entirely without reference to a personal motive; indeed how could he
possibly do anything that had no reference to himself that is without
inward compulsion which must always have its basis in a personal need
how could the ego act without ego--a god who on the other hand is
all love as he is usually represented would not be capable of a
solitary unegoistic act whence one is reminded of a reflection of
lichtenbergs which is in truth taken from a lower sphere we cannot
possibly feel for others as the expression goes; we feel only for
ourselves. the assertion sounds hard but it is not if rightly
understood. a man loves neither his father nor his mother nor his wife
nor his child but simply the feelings which they inspire. or as la
rochefoucauld says if you think you love your mistress for the mere
love of her you are very much mistaken. why acts of love are more
highly prized than others namely not on account of their nature but on
account of their utility has already been explained in the section on
the origin of moral feelings. but if a man should wish to be all love
like the god aforesaid and want to do all things for others and nothing
for himself the procedure would be fundamentally impossible because he
_must_ do a great deal for himself before there would be any possibility
of doing anything for the love of others. it is also essential that
others be sufficiently egoistic to accept always and at all times this
self sacrifice and living for others so that the men of love and self
sacrifice have an interest in the survival of unloving and selfish
egoists while the highest morality in order to maintain itself must
formally enforce the existence of immorality wherein it would be really
destroying itself.--further the idea of a god perturbs and discourages
as long as it is accepted but as to how it originated can no longer in
the present state of comparative ethnological science be a matter of
doubt and with the insight into the origin of this belief all faith
collapses. what happens to the christian who compares his nature with
that of god is exactly what happened to don quixote who depreciated his
own prowess because his head was filled with the wondrous deeds of the
heroes of chivalrous romance. the standard of measurement which both
employ belongs to the domain of fable.--but if the idea of god
collapses so too does the feeling of sin as a violation of divine
rescript as a stain upon a god-like creation. there still apparently
remains that discouragement which is closely allied with fear of the
punishment of worldly justice or of the contempt of ones fellow men.
the keenest thorn in the sentiment of sin is dulled when it is perceived
that ones acts have contravened human tradition human rules and human
laws without having thereby endangered the eternal salvation of the
soul and its relations with deity. if finally men attain to the
conviction of the absolute necessity of all acts and of their utter
irresponsibility and then absorb it into their flesh and blood every
relic of conscience pangs will disappear.




if now as stated the christian through certain delusive feelings is
betrayed into self contempt that is by a false and unscientific view of
his acts and feelings he must nevertheless perceive with the utmost
amazement that this state of self contempt of conscience pangs of
despair in particular does not last that there are hours during which
all these things are wafted away from the soul and he feels himself once
more free and courageous. the truth is that joy in his own being the
fulness of his own powers in connection with the inevitable decline of
his profound excitation with the lapse of time bore off the palm of
victory. the man loves himself once more he feels it--but this very new
love this new self esteem seems to him incredible. he can see in it
only the wholly unmerited stream of the light of grace shed down upon
him. if he formerly saw in every event merely warnings threats
punishments and every kind of indication of divine anger he now reads
into his experiences the grace of god. the latter circumstance seems to
him full of love the former as a helpful pointing of the way and his
entirely joyful frame of mind now seems to him to be an absolute proof
of the goodness of god. as formerly in his states of discouragement he
interpreted his conduct falsely so now he does the same with his
experiences. his state of consolation is now regarded as the effect
produced by some external power. the love with which at bottom he
loves himself seems to be the divine love. that which he calls grace
and the preliminary of salvation is in reality self-grace
self-salvation.




therefore a certain false psychology a certain kind of imaginativeness
in the interpretation of motives and experiences is the essential
preliminary to being a christian and to experiencing the need of
salvation. upon gaining an insight into this wandering of the reason and
the imagination one ceases to be a christian.




=of christian asceticism and sanctity.=--much as some thinkers have
exerted themselves to impart an air of the miraculous to those singular
phenomena known as asceticism and sanctity to question which or to
account for which upon a rational basis would be wickedness and
sacrilege the temptation to this wickedness is none the less great. a
powerful impulse of nature has in every age led to protest against such
phenomena. at any rate science inasmuch as it is the imitation of
nature permits the casting of doubts upon the inexplicable character
and the supernal degree of such phenomena. it is true that heretofore
science has not succeeded in its attempts at explanation. the phenomena
remain unexplained still to the great satisfaction of those who revere
moral miracles. for speaking generally the unexplained must rank as
the inexplicable the inexplicable as the non-natural supernatural
miraculous--so runs the demand in the souls of all the religious and all
the metaphysicians even the artists if they happen to be thinkers
whereas the scientific man sees in this demand the evil
principle.--the universal first apparent truth that is encountered in
the contemplation of sanctity and asceticism is that their nature is
complicated; for nearly always within the physical world as well as in
the moral the apparently miraculous may be traced successfully to the
complex the obscure the multi-conditioned. let us venture then to
isolate a few impulses in the soul of the saint and the ascetic to
consider them separately and then view them as a synthetic development.




there is an obstinacy against oneself certain sublimated forms of which
are included in asceticism. certain kinds of men are under such a strong
necessity of exercising their power and dominating impulses that if
other objects are lacking or if they have not succeeded with other
objects they will actually tyrannize over some portions of their own
nature or over sections and stages of their own personality. thus do
many thinkers bring themselves to views which are far from likely to
increase or improve their fame. many deliberately bring down the
contempt of others upon themselves although they could easily have
retained consideration by silence. others contradict earlier opinions
and do not shrink from the ordeal of being deemed inconsistent. on the
contrary they strive for this and act like eager riders who enjoy
horseback exercise most when the horse is skittish. thus will men in
dangerous paths ascend to the highest steeps in order to laugh to scorn
their own fear and their own trembling limbs. thus will the philosopher
embrace the dogmas of asceticism humility sanctity in the light of
which his own image appears in its most hideous aspect. this crushing of
self this mockery of ones own nature this spernere se sperni out of
which religions have made so much is in reality but a very high
development of vanity. the whole ethic of the sermon on the mount
belongs in this category man has a true delight in mastering himself
through exaggerated pretensions or excessive expedients and later
deifying this tyrannically exacting something within him. in every
scheme of ascetic ethics man prays to one part of himself as if it were
god and hence it is necessary for him to treat the rest of himself as
devil.




=man is not at all hours equally moral=; this is established. if ones
morality be judged according to ones capacity for great self
sacrificing resolutions and abnegations which when continual and made
a habit are known as sanctity one is in affection or disposition the
most moral while higher excitement supplies wholly new impulses which
were one calm and cool as ordinarily one would not deem oneself even
capable of. how comes this apparently from the propinquity of all great
and lofty emotional states. if a man is brought to an extraordinary
pitch of feeling he can resolve upon a fearful revenge or upon a fearful
renunciation of his thirst for vengeance indifferently. he craves under
the influences of powerful emotion the great the powerful the
immense and if he chances to perceive that the sacrifice of himself
will afford him as much satisfaction as the sacrifice of another or
will afford him more he will choose self sacrifice. what concerns him
particularly is simply the unloading of his emotion. hence he readily
to relieve his tension grasps the darts of the enemy and buries them in
his own breast. that in self abnegation and not in revenge the element
of greatness consisted must have been brought home to mankind only after
long habituation. a god who sacrifices himself would be the most
powerful and most effective symbol of this sort of greatness. as the
conquest of the most hardly conquered enemy the sudden mastering of a
passion--thus does such abnegation _appear_ hence it passes for the
summit of morality. in reality all that is involved is the exchange of
one idea for another whilst the temperament remained at a like altitude
a like tidal state. men when coming out of the spell or resting from
such passionate excitation no longer understand the morality of such
instants but the admiration of all who participated in the occasion
sustains them. pride is their support if the passion and the
comprehension of their act weaken. therefore at bottom even such acts
of self-abnegation are not moral inasmuch as they are not done with a
strict regard for others. rather do others afford the high strung
temperament an opportunity to lighten itself through such abnegation.




=even the ascetic seeks to make life easier= and generally by means of
absolute subjection to another will or to an all inclusive rule and
ritual pretty much as the brahmin leaves absolutely nothing to his own
volition but is guided in every moment of his life by some holy
injunction or other. this subjection is a potent means of acquiring
dominion over oneself. one is occupied hence time does not bang heavy
and there is no incitement of the personal will and of the individual
passion. the deed once done there is no feeling of responsibility nor
the sting of regret. one has given up ones own will once for all and
this is easier than to give it up occasionally as it is also easier
wholly to renounce a desire than to yield to it in measured degree. when
we consider the present relation of man to the state we perceive
unconditional obedience is easier than conditional. the holy person also
makes his lot easier through the complete surrender of his life
personality and it is all delusion to admire such a phenomenon as the
loftiest heroism of morality. it is always more difficult to assert
ones personality without shrinking and without hesitation than to give
it up altogether in the manner indicated and it requires moreover more
intellect and thought.




after having discovered in many of the less comprehensible actions mere
manifestations of pleasure in emotion for its own sake i fancy i can
detect in the self contempt which characterises holy persons and also
in their acts of self torture through hunger and scourgings
distortions and chaining of the limbs acts of madness simply a means
whereby such natures may resist the general exhaustion of their will to
live their nerves. they employ the most painful expedients to escape
if only for a time from the heaviness and weariness in which they are
steeped by their great mental indolence and their subjection to a will
other than their own.




=the most usual means= by which the ascetic and the sanctified
individual seeks to make life more endurable comprises certain combats
of an inner nature involving alternations of victory and prostration.
for this purpose an enemy is necessary and he is found in the so called
inner enemy. that is the holy individual makes use of his tendency to
vanity domineering and pride and of his mental longings in order to
contemplate his life as a sort of continuous battle and himself as a
battlefield in which good and evil spirits wage war with varying
fortune. it is an established fact that the imagination is restrained
through the regularity and adequacy of sexual intercourse while on the
other hand abstention from or great irregularity in sexual intercourse
will cause the imagination to run riot. the imaginations of many of the
christian saints were obscene to a degree; and because of the theory
that sexual desires were in reality demons that raged within them the
saints did not feel wholly responsible for them. it is to this
conviction that we are indebted for the highly instructive sincerity of
their evidence against themselves. it was to their interest that this
contest should always be kept up in some fashion because by means of
this contest as already stated their empty lives gained distraction.
in order that the contest might seem sufficiently great to inspire
sympathy and admiration in the unsanctified it was essential that
sexual capacity be ever more and more damned and denounced. indeed the
danger of eternal damnation was so closely allied to this capacity that
for whole generations christians showed their children with actual
conscience pangs. what evil may not have been done to humanity through
this! and yet here the truth is just upside down an exceedingly
unseemly attitude for the truth. christianity it is true had said that
every man is conceived and born in sin and in the intolerable and
excessive christianity of calderon this thought is again perverted and
entangled into the most distorted paradox extant in the well known lines

     the greatest sin of man
     is the sin of being born.

in all pessimistic religions the act of procreation is looked upon as
evil in itself. this is far from being the general human opinion. it is
not even the opinion of all pessimists. empedocles for example knows
nothing of anything shameful devilish and sinful in it. he sees rather
in the great field of bliss of unholiness simply a healthful and hopeful
phenomenon aphrodite. she is to him an evidence that strife does not
always rage but that some time a gentle demon is to wield the sceptre.
the christian pessimists of practice had as stated a direct interest
in the prevalence of an opposite belief. they needed in the loneliness
and the spiritual wilderness of their lives an ever living enemy and a
universally known enemy through whose conquest they might appear to the
unsanctified as utterly incomprehensible and half unnatural beings. when
this enemy at last as a result of their mode of life and their
shattered health took flight forever they were able immediately to
people their inner selves with new demons. the rise and fall of the
balance of cheerfulness and despair maintained their addled brains in a
totally new fluctuation of longing and peace of soul. and in that period
psychology served not only to cast suspicion on everything human but to
wound and scourge it to crucify it. man wanted to find himself as base
and evil as possible. man sought to become anxious about the state of
his soul he wished to be doubtful of his own capacity. everything
natural with which man connects the idea of badness and sinfulness as
for instance is still customary in regard to the erotic injures and
degrades the imagination occasions a shamed aspect leads man to war
upon himself and makes him uncertain distrustful of himself. even his
dreams acquire a tincture of the unclean conscience. and yet this
suffering because of the natural element in certain things is wholly
superfluous. it is simply the result of opinions regarding the things.
it is easy to understand why men become worse than they are if they are
brought to look upon the unavoidably natural as bad and later to feel it
as of evil origin. it is the master stroke of religions and metaphysics
that wish to make man out bad and sinful by nature to render nature
suspicious in his eyes and to so make himself evil for he learns to
feel himself evil when he cannot divest himself of nature. he gradually
comes to look upon himself after a long life lived naturally so
oppressed by a weight of sin that supernatural powers become necessary
to relieve him of the burden; and with this notion comes the so called
need of salvation which is the result not of a real but of an imaginary
sinfulness. go through the separate moral expositions in the vouchers of
christianity and it will always be found that the demands are excessive
in order that it may be impossible for man to satisfy them. the object
is not that he may become moral but that he may feel as sinful as
possible. if this feeling had not been rendered agreeable to man--why
should he have improvised such an ideal and clung to it so long as in
the ancient world an incalculable strength of intellect and capacity for
feeling was squandered in order to increase the joy of living through
feastful systems of worship so in the era of christianity an equally
incalculable quantity of intellectual capacity has been sacrificed in
another endeavor that man should in every way feel himself sinful and
thereby be moved inspired inspirited. to move to inspire to inspirit
at any cost--is not this the freedom cry of an exhausted over-ripe
over cultivated age the circle of all the natural sensations had been
gone through a hundred times the soul had grown weary. then the saints
and the ascetics found a new order of ecstacies. they set themselves
before the eyes of all not alone as models for imitation to many but as
fearful and yet delightful spectacles on the boundary line between this
world and the next world where in that period everyone thought he saw
at one time rays of heavenly light at another fearful threatening
tongues of flame. the eye of the saint directed upon the fearful
significance of the shortness of earthly life upon the imminence of the
last judgment upon eternal life hereafter; this glowering eye in an
emaciated body caused men in the old time world to tremble to the
depths of their being. to look to look away and shudder to feel anew
the fascination of the spectacle to yield to it sate oneself upon it
until the soul trembled with ardor and fever--that was the last pleasure
left to classical antiquity when its sensibilities had been blunted by
the arena and the gladiatorial show.




=to sum up all that has been said= that condition of soul at which the
saint or expectant saint is rejoiced is a combination of elements which
we are all familiar with except that under other influences than those
of mere religious ideation they customarily arouse the censure of men in
the same way that when combined with religion itself and regarded as the
supreme attainment of sanctity they are object of admiration and even
of prayer--at least in more simple times. very soon the saint turns upon
himself that severity that is so closely allied to the instinct of
domination at any price and which inspire even in the most solitary
individual the sense of power. soon his swollen sensitiveness of feeling
breaks forth from the longing to restrain his passions within it and is
transformed into a longing to master them as if they were wild steeds
the master impulse being ever that of a proud spirit; next he craves a
complete cessation of all perturbing fascinating feelings a waking
sleep an enduring repose in the lap of a dull animal plant-like
indolence. next he seeks the battle and extinguishes it within himself
because weariness and boredom confront him. he binds his
self-deification with self-contempt. he delights in the wild tumult of
his desires and the sharp pain of sin in the very idea of being lost.
he is able to play his very passions for instance the desire to
domineer a trick so that he goes to the other extreme of abject
humiliation and subjection so that his overwrought soul is without any
restraint through this antithesis. and finally when indulgence in
visions in talks with the dead or with divine beings overcomes him
this is really but a form of gratification that he craves perhaps a
form of gratification in which all other gratifications are blended.
novalis one of the authorities in matters of sanctity because of his
experience and instinct betrays the whole secret with the utmost
simplicity when he says it is remarkable that the close connection of
gratification religion and cruelty has not long ago made men aware of
their inner relationship and common tendency.




=not what the saint is but what he was in= the eyes of the
non-sanctified gives him his historical importance. because there
existed a delusion respecting the saint his soul states being falsely
viewed and his personality being sundered as much as possible from
humanity as a something incomparable and supernatural because of these
things he attained the extraordinary with which he swayed the
imaginations of whole nations and whole ages. even he knew himself not
for even he regarded his dispositions passions and actions in
accordance with a system of interpretation as artificial and exaggerated
as the pneumatic interpretation of the bible. the distorted and diseased
in his own nature with its blending of spiritual poverty defective
knowledge ruined health overwrought nerves remained as hidden from
his view as from the view of his beholders. he was neither a
particularly good man nor a particularly bad man but he stood for
something that was far above the human standard in wisdom and goodness.
faith in him sustained faith in the divine and miraculous in a
religious significance of all existence in an impending day of
judgment. in the last rays of the setting sun of the ancient world
which fell upon the christian peoples the shadowy form of the saint
attained enormous proportions--to such enormous proportions indeed
that down even to our own age which no longer believes in god there
are thinkers who believe in the saints.




it stands to reason that this sketch of the saint made upon the model
of the whole species can be confronted with many opposing sketches that
would create a more agreeable impression. there are certain exceptions
among the species who distinguish themselves either by especial
gentleness or especial humanity and perhaps by the strength of their
own personality. others are in the highest degree fascinating because
certain of their delusions shed a particular glow over their whole
being as is the case with the founder of christianity who took himself
for the only begotten son of god and hence felt himself sinless; so that
through his imagination--that should not be too harshly judged since the
whole of antiquity swarmed with sons of god--he attained the same goal
the sense of complete sinlessness complete irresponsibility that can
now be attained by every individual through science.--in the same manner
i have viewed the saints of india who occupy an intermediate station
between the christian saints and the greek philosophers and hence are
not to be regarded as a pure type. knowledge and science--as far as they
existed--and superiority to the rest of mankind by logical discipline
and training of the intellectual powers were insisted upon by the
buddhists as essential to sanctity just as they were denounced by the
christian world as the indications of sinfulness.